Title: Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=Ax550Vokon

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

Soumyabrata Kundu 1 Risi Kondor 1 2 

# Abstract 

We introduce Steerable Transformers, an exten-sion of the Vision Transformer that is equivari-ant to the action of the Special Euclidean group 

SE( d). We propose an steerable self-attention mechanism that operates on features extracted by steerable convolutions. Our experiments in both two and three dimensions show augmenting steerable convolutional networks with steerable transformer leads to improved performance. 

# 1. Introduction 

Transformers have emerged as the preferred architecture for natural language processing tasks, with recent powerful models like Chat-GPT employing this framework. Their relatively straightforward design, coupled with remarkable success, has led to their widespread adoption across various domains, including image classification (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), object detection (Carion et al., 2020), and graph based problems (Dwivedi & Bresson, 2020). The self-attention mechanism (Bahdanau et al., 2014) employed in transformer architectures has proven to be crucial for cap-turing relationships between different parts of the input se-quence. Dosovitskiy et al. (2021) introduced transformers as an alternative to traditional convolutional architectures for vision tasks. Unlike convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which focus on local neighborhoods, transform-ers excel at capturing relations across different parts of the input. Equivariant neural network architectures have gained sig-nificant popularity in recent years due to their inherent abil-ity to comprehend the underlying symmetries of problems, making them highly effective tools for real world tasks. For instance, achieving equivariance to the permutation group 

Sn is crucial in graph based problems, since the structure          

> 1Department of Statistics, University of Chicago, Chicago, USA 2Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago, Chicago, USA. Correspondence to: Soumyabrata Kundu
> <soumyabratakundu@uchicago.edu >.
> Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Vancouver, Canada. PMLR 267, 2025. Copyright 2025 by the author(s).

of the graph remains invariant under permutations of node labels (Thiede et al., 2020; Wang et al., 2020). Similarly, in vision tasks, it is desirable to have equivariance to rigid body transformations such as rotations and translations. Recent studies by Cohen & Welling (2016; 2017); Worrall et al. (2017); Weiler et al. (2018a); Weiler & Cesa (2019); Thiede et al. (2020); Anderson et al. (2019), and many more, have demonstrated the remarkable efficacy of these equivariant architectures in enforcing symmetry, without relying on brute force techniques like data augmentation. In vision tasks, steerable convolutions have proven to be a powerful tool for enforcing equivariance to rotations and translations (Cohen & Welling, 2016; Worrall et al., 2017; Cohen & Welling, 2017; Cohen et al., 2018; Weiler et al., 2018a; Weiler & Cesa, 2019). These networks primarily operate in Fourier space, leveraging representations of the underlying group to extract rotation and translation equiv-ariant features from the data. These architectures are ef-fective at learning relevant features in local neighborhoods. Conversely, transformer architectures excel at learning re-lationships between distant regions of an image. Our con-tribution lies in combining these two concepts, yielding equivariant architectures that are capable of capturing both local and global patterns in images. 

1.1. Related Work 

The concept of attention was first proposed by Bahdanau et al. (2014) in the context of sequence modeling. Building on this, Vaswani et al. (2017) developed the transformer architecture for natural language translation tasks. Later, Dosovitskiy et al. (2021) extended the transformer frame-work to visual domains, proposing a hybrid model that in-tegrates features extracted from conventional CNNs. In contrast, Ramachandran et al. (2019) introduced a fully at-tention based architecture that entirely replaces traditional convolutional networks. Transformer architectures are inherently nonlinear in their inputs, and applying them directly into equivariant archi-tectures can break equivariance. This has motivated in-creasing interest in developing transformer models that are designed to preserve equivariance. Romero & Cordonnier (2021) demonstrated that vision transformers using relative positional encoding (Shaw et al., 2018) exhibit translation 1Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

equivariance. They extended the attention based frame-work of Ramachandran et al. (2019) by formulating the attention mechanism over the group SE(2) , thereby achiev-ing both rotation and translation equivariance in two di-mensions. Building on this approach, Xu et al. (2023) pro-posed a novel positional encoding operator to further im-prove performance. Additionally, Romero et al. (2020) in-corporated attention directly into convolution by defining the attention scores over the equivariance group. In three dimensions, attention based methods that enforce equivariance to rotations and translations have been ex-plored. However, to the best of our knowledge, these ef-forts have been limited to point cloud data. Fuchs et al. (2020) introduced an SE(3) -equivariant architecture for point clouds by incorporating the self-attention mecha-nism into the Tensor Field Network (Thomas et al., 2018). Liao & Smidt (2023) proposed Equiformer, an equivari-ant extension of the Graph Attention Network (Velickovi´ cet al., 2018) for 3D point clouds, and subsequently, Liao et al. (2024) presented EquiformerV2, a more computa-tionally efficient variant that reduces SO(3) convolutions to SO(2) , leveraging ideas from Passaro & Zitnick (2023). Chen & Villar (2022) achieved equivariant attention by pro-jecting data onto SE(3) -equivariant and invariant features, based on equivariant feature maps developed by Villar et al. (2021). Hutchinson et al. (2021) proposed a transformer framework with attention mechanism that is equivariant un-der the action of general Lie groups, using regular rep-resentations. For shape reconstruction tasks, Chatzipan-tazis et al. (2023) introduced an SE(3) -equivariant atten-tion model. 

1.2. Our Contribution 

Romero et al. (2020) explored equivariant transformer architectures for two dimensional images by integrating the self-attention mechanism within convolutional layers. While effective, this comes at the cost of significantly higher memory usage. In contrast, the architectures intro-duced by Xu et al. (2023), which build on the model of Ra-machandran et al. (2019), entirely eliminate convolutional components in favor of self-attention based mechanisms. Nevertheless, as noted by Xiao et al. (2021), incorporating a convolutional encoder prior to the transformer leads to better performance, suggesting a more balanced and effec-tive design. In three dimensions, Fuchs et al. (2020); Hutchinson et al. (2021); Liao & Smidt (2023) proposed SE(3) -equivariant transformer architectures tailored for point cloud data. Al-though volumetric data, in principle, can be conceptual-ized as point clouds arranged on a regular grid, using these point cloud based methods on dense volumetric inputs can impose inappropriate inductive biases, as it overlooks the structured nature of the underlying grid. Furthermore, treating volumetric data as point clouds and applying these methods can lead to excessive memory usage, often result-ing in out-of-memory errors. To address these challenges, we present a novel steerable transformer architecture specifically designed for volumet-ric data in d dimensions. Our proposed steerable trans-former integrates on top of a steerable convolutional en-coder and, as demonstrated through our experiments, en-hances the performance of steerable convolutions. Draw-ing inspiration primarily from Dosovitskiy et al. (2021) and Fuchs et al. (2020), our method operates in the Fourier do-main, by using group representations to learn equivariant features. While Vaswani et al. (2017) employ fixed posi-tional functions and Dosovitskiy et al. (2021) use learnable positional encodings, our method integrates both ideas by modulating a fixed positional function with learnable scal-ing parameters. 

# 2. Background 

In this section we introduce the relevant background re-quired to design the steerable transformer architecture. 

2.1. The Multihead Self-Attention Mechanism 

The attention mechanism, originally introduced by Bah-danau et al. (2014) for sequence-to-sequence learning, re-lies on three core components for each element in the input sequence: query vector qi, key vector kj , and value vector 

vj . The scores sij measure the compatibility between the query and key vectors using a scaled dot product. These scores are passed through a softmax function to produce attention weights αij , which quantify the contribution of each value vector to the output. The output is then com-puted as a weighted sum of the value vectors: ATTN (qi, {kj }, {vj }) = 

> N

X

> j=1

αij vj .

The attention weights αij are given by 

sij = qTi kj

√dK

, αij = exp( sij )

PNj′=1 exp( sij ′ ) ,

where dK denotes the dimension of the query and key vec-tors, and N represents the number of elements in the input sequence. Vaswani et al. (2017) proposed a Multihead ver-sion of this attention mechanism which involves stacking multiple attention mechanisms, concatenating their outputs and applying a linear transformation to get the final result: Concat (ATTN 1, . . . , ATTN h)WO , WO ∈ Rhd V ×dmodel .

Here, dV denotes the dimension of the value vectors, and 

dmodel denotes the dimension of the output. Typically, the 2Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

query, key, and value vectors are obtained by multiplying the input sequence with learnable weight matrices followed by adding positional encoding .

Positional Encoding: Positional encoding in transform-ers is used to embed information about the position of words or tokens within a sequence into their input repre-sentations. In vision applications, these encodings help the model retain spatial awareness by indicating the original locations of image patches. Vaswani et al. (2017) used sine and cosine functions at different frequencies to encode po-sitions. A refinement of this approach, known as relative positional encoding, was proposed by Shaw et al. (2018). Unlike fixed encodings, this method learns representations that capture relative distances between elements in the in-put. As we will discuss later, incorporating relative posi-tional encoding is essential for preserving equivariance. 

2.2. Vision Transformers 

Dosovitskiy et al. (2021) adapted the transformer architec-ture for vision tasks. Their method involves partitioning an image into equal sized patches, which are then processed by a transformer. The resulting feature representations are used for downstream tasks like image classification. As-suming a single input channel, the operations of a vision transformer layer can be summarized as follows: 

z0 = [ x1E, x2E, . . . , xN E] + Epos 

z′ 

> m

= MULTI -A TTN (LN (zM −1)) + zM −1 m = 1 , . . . M zm = MLP (LN (zm−1)) + z′ 

> m

m = 1 , . . . M. 

Here, xi ∈ Rp represents a flattened image patch, E ∈

Rp×dmodel is the learnable linear weights matrix, Epos ∈

RN ×dmodel is the positional encoding, and m indexes the various blocks of the transformer. LN denotes a normal-ization layer, and MLP stands for a Multilayer Perceptron. 

dmodel is the dimension of the features fed into the trans-former, which remains fixed throughout the entire trans-former layer. Typically, the MLP layer comprises two hid-den layers separated by a non-linearity (Vaswani et al., 2017; Dosovitskiy et al., 2021). 

2.3. Equivariance 

Equivariance describes a property in which a map between vector spaces commutes with the action of a group G (see Appendix A.2 for definition of group action). Specifically, for each element g ∈ G, suppose we have linear operators 

Tg : V → V and T ′ 

> g

: W → W that represent the action of 

g on vector spaces V and W, respectively. A map λ : V → W is said to be equivariant if, for all v ∈ V and g ∈ G,

λ(Tg (v)) = T ′ 

> g

(λ(v)) .

Intuitively, this means that applying the group action be-fore or after the map λ leads to the same outcome, guar-anteeing that the resulting features respect the symmetry structure imposed by the group. Equivariance naturally arises as a desirable property in many real world applica-tions that involve underlying symmetries, such as permu-tations in graph structured data or rigid body transforma-tions in images. There is extensive research on equivari-ant neural networks, particularly in the setting where the map λ is linear (Worrall et al., 2017; Cohen et al., 2018; Weiler et al., 2018a; Cohen & Welling, 2017; 2016; Weiler & Cesa, 2019; Kondor et al., 2018; Anderson et al., 2019; Thomas et al., 2018). 

2.4. Steerable Convolutions 

Steerable neural networks are designed to exhibit equivari-ance to the action of the Special Euclidean group SE( d)

in d dimensions (see Appendix A.1 for definition). Steer-able convolutions represent the most general class of lin-ear maps that are equivariant with respect to the action of SE( d) (Kondor & Trivedi, 2018). Although practical neural networks work with finite resolution rasterized im-ages, we adopt a continuous formulation for the network’s inputs and filters to simplify the mathematical exposition and provide a clear overview of steerable convolutions. In this setting, a d dimensional image with a single input channel is represented as a compactly supported function 

f in : Rd → R, and analogously, a filter is also repre-sented as a compactly supported function w : Rd → R.The output of a steerable convolution layer is a function 

f out : SE( d) → R that can be expressed as 

f out (x, R ) = 

Z

> Rd

f in (x + Ry)w(y) dy, (1) 

f out (x, R ) = 

Z

> SO( d)

Z

> Rd

f in (x + Ry, RR ′)

w(y, R ′) dy dμ (R′). (2) Here, x ∈ Rd, R ∈ SO( d) and μ denotes the Haar measure on SO( d) (see Appendix A.4 for definition). The presence of two distinct formulas is due to the fact that the input to the first layer is a vector field on Rd, whereas the input to subsequent layers is a vector field on SE( d). Equation (1) represents the formula for the first layer, while (2) repre-sents subsequent layers. These layers are equivariant under the action of the group SE( d). Specifically, if the input function f in is transformed by an element (t, R ) ∈ SE( d)

according to 

[( t, R )−1 · f in ]( x) = f in (Rx + t), (3) then the corresponding output f out transforms as 

[( t, R )−1 · f out ]( x, R ′) = f out (Rx + t, RR ′). (4) 3Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

For compact groups like SO( d), where discretization is not straightforward, it is advantageous to compute the rotation component of the output feature map of (1)-(2) in Fourier space (Worrall et al., 2017). The Fourier transform of a function f on a compact group can be computed by inte-grating it against it’s irreducible representations or irreps 

(see Appendix A.3 for definition): 

bf (ρ) = 

Z

> SO( d)

f (R) ρ(R) dμ (R). (5) Leveraging the Convolution Theorem, equations (1)-(2) in Fourier space becomes a matrix product of the Fourier transforms of the input and the filter. By the translation property of the Fourier transform, the vector fields satisfy the property that when the input transforms under the action of SE( d) as in (3), the corresponding output transforms as 

[( t, R )−1 · df out ]( x, ρ ) = ρ(R)† df out (Rx + t, ρ ). (6) In the two dimensions, the irreps of SO(2) are just complex exponential indexed by integers, ρk(θ) = eιkθ for k ∈ Z.Therefore, the kth frequency component of the output fea-ture map is a function 

df out (·, k ) : R2 → C. (7) In three dimensions, the irreps of SO(3) are indexed by non-negative integers ℓ ∈ Z≥0, and are given by ρℓ(R) = 

Dℓ(R), the so called Wigner D-matrices (Wigner, 1932), which are unitary matrices of size 2ℓ+1 . Since the columns of the output can be interpreted as separate channels, the ℓth 

Fourier component of the output feature map for a single channel can be represented as a function 

df out (·, ℓ ) : R3 → C2ℓ+1 . (8) 

Non-linearities: In steerable neural networks, applying non-linearities like ReLU in Fourier space can disrupt equivariance. One approach to mitigate this issue is to tran-sition back to time domain, apply the desired non-linearity there, and then return to Fourier domain (Cohen et al., 2018). However, this back and forth transformation can be computationally expensive and error prone, especially on groups like SO (3) , where the uniform grid gives rise to singularities. As an alternative, Fourier space non-linearities are pre-ferred in steerable neural networks. These non-linearities act directly on Fourier space while preserving equivari-ance. Several such non-linearities can be found in the liter-ature. Worrall et al. (2017) apply non-linearity to the norm of the Fourier vector, as the norm remains invariant under rotations. Kondor et al. (2018); Anderson et al. (2019) use the Clebsch–Gordan non-linearity, which involves a tensor product of Fourier vectors followed by a Clebsch– Gordan decomposition. Weiler et al. (2018a) introduce an-other steerable convolution filter to serve as a non-linearity. These methods enable effective non-linear transformations in Fourier space, while preserving equivariance. 

# 3. Method 

The methodology behind steerable transformers builds on the foundation of vision transformers (Dosovitskiy et al., 2021), which operate on “patchified” images, i.e., linear projections of fixed sized patches extracted from the input image. Conceptually, this patchification process is anal-ogous to applying strided convolutions, where the stride is equal to the kernel size. Dosovitskiy et al. (2021) also propose a hybrid architecture that extends this idea by em-ploying a deeper convolutional encoder to extract more ex-pressive features, which are then used as input to the trans-former layers. In steerable transformers, we build on this idea by using feature maps extracted from steerable convo-lution encoder as input to the transformer architecture. In the discussion of steerable convolutions in Section 2.4, the input, filter and consequently, the output were modeled as compactly supported functions defined over continuous domains. We adopt this continuous perspective in the dis-cussion that follows, while acknowledging that, in practical implementations, the output of a steerable convolutional encoder for a given irrep is represented as a collection of complex-valued vectors arranged on a discrete grid. Ac-cordingly, any integrals in the theoretical formulation can be approximated by summations over this grid. While the number of channels associated with each irrep may vary in practice, for brevity, we consider the simplified case in which all irreps share the same number of channels. The generalization to a variable channel setting is straightfor-ward. Assume that the input has dmodel channels for each irrep. Then, the input to the transformer corresponding to an irrep 

ρ can be represented as a function 

f in (x, ρ ) ∈ Cdρ×dmodel , (9) which has compact support Ω( f in ) for all ρ, and satisfies the equivariance constraint (6). Here, x ∈ Rd, and dρ de-notes the dimension of ρ . In two dimensions, all irreps are one dimensional (7), whereas in three dimensions, the ℓth 

representation has dimension 2ℓ + 1 (8). 

3.1. Steerable Self-Attention Mechanism 

The query, key, and value vectors are computed by apply-ing learnable weight matrices to the input f in in (9), fol-lowed by the addition of positional encodings. Romero & Cordonnier (2021) showed that incorporating relative po-4Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

Figure 1: The schematic illustrates the steerable self-attention mechanism for a single head (h = 1) and one query dimension (dK = 1) (left) and a steerable transformer encoder layer (right); c.f. Figure 1 by Dosovitskiy et al. (2021). sitional encodings (Shaw et al., 2018) into self-attention enforces translation equivariance. Our design of steerable positional encodings is inspired by this relative positional encoding. We employ a hybrid strategy that blends learn-able weights and fixed functions to encode positional infor-mation. In the context of steerable neural networks, it is essential that positional encodings also encode rotational structure, which is naturally expressed in Fourier space. Accordingly, for each irrep ρ, we define the steerable positional encoding as a continuous function 

P(ρ) : Rd × Rd → Cdρ .

We elaborate on the exact forms of these encodings in the next section. For now, we focus on the design of the steer-able self-attention mechanism. Within this framework, the query, key, and value vectors corresponding to an input map 

f in are given by 

q(ρ)(x) = f in (x, ρ )W(ρ) 

> Q

(10) 

k(ρ)(x, y) = f in (x, ρ )W(ρ) 

> K

+ P(ρ)(x, y) (11) 

v(ρ)(x, y) = f in (x, ρ )W(ρ) 

> V

+ P(ρ)(x, y), (12) where W(ρ) 

> Q

, W(ρ) 

> K

∈ Cdmodel ×dK and W(ρ) 

> V

∈ Cdmodel ×dV .Next, the score function is calculated by taking the scaled dot product between the query and key vectors: 

s(x, y) = X

> ρ

vec( q(ρ)(y)) † vec( k(ρ)(x, y)) 

√dK

. (13) Here, the vec operation flattens the matrix into a vector. The attention scores are then obtained by applying the soft-max function to the raw scores. In continous formulation this can be expressed as 

α(x, y) = exp( |s(x, y)|)

R  

> Ω( fin )

exp( |s(x, z)|) dz . (14) Since we are dealing with complex numbers, we use the absolute value of the scores, and the dot product involves the conjugate transpose, denoted by ·†, instead of a reg-ular transpose. Finally, the output for each position and Fourier component is computed as a linear combination of the value vectors and attention scores: 

f out (x, ρ ) = 

Z 

> Ω( fin )

α(x, y)v(ρ)(x, y) dy. (15) It is easy to verify that if the steerable positional encodings are set to zero, then by the unitary nature of the irreps, the output of the self-attention mechanism satisfies the equiv-ariance constraint (6). However, to encode the spatial in-formation of the input patches, we want to use non-trivial functions as steerable positional encodings. The following theorem establishes the necessary and sufficient condition that P(ρ) must satisfy for the self-attention mechanism to preserve equivariance. 

Theorem 1. For any f in that transforms under the action of SE( d) according to the equivariance constraint (6) , the output of the self-attention mechanism also satisfies (6) for any collection of weight matrices if and only if, for every 

(t, R ) ∈ SE( d), the positional encodings P(ρ) satisfy 

P(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) = ρ(R) P(ρ)(x, y), (16) 

for all x, y ∈ Rd and for all irreps ρ.

In the following section, we elaborate on the construction of P(ρ) that satisfies the constraint (16). 5Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

Figure 2: Visual representation of steerable positional encoding. Arrows denote directional components, while the color gradient indicates magnitude, decaying proportionally to r−2.In practice, the integrals appearing in equations (14) and (15) are approximated by discrete summations over a finite set of grid points. Specifically, the attention weights and output are computed as 

α(xi, xj ) = exp( |s(xi, xj )|)

PNj′=1 exp( |s(xi, xj′ )|)

f out (xi, ρ ) = 

> N

X

> j=1

α(xi, xj )v(ρ)(xi, xj ),

respectively, where {xi}Ni=1 denotes a set of discrete spa-tial locations on a grid. For multihead self-attention, this mechanism is repeated independently for h heads. Finally, the outputs are concatenated, and each Fourier component is scaled by another matrix W(ρ) 

> O

∈ Chd V ×dmodel . Consis-tent with Vaswani et al. (2017), we choose dV = dK =

dmodel /h .

3.2. Steerable Positional Encoding 

Theorem 1 establishes necessary and sufficient conditions that P(ρ) must satisfy to ensure that the self-attention mechanism preserves equivariance. In particular, for any translation vector t ∈ Rd, the positional encoding must satisfy the condition 

P(ρ)(x + t, y + t) = P(ρ)(x, y).

This implies that P(ρ) depends only on the relative posi-tion, and can thus be expressed as a function of a single argument P(ρ)(x − y). As a result, the encoding is in-variant under translations. Furthermore, for any rotation 

R ∈ SO( d), it has the property that 

P(ρ)(Rx) = ρ(R) P(ρ)(x). (17) A natural and expressive choice for such a function is the Spherical Harmonic basis functions (Frye & Efthimiou, 2012). In two dimensions, this is takes the form 

P (k)(x) = ϕ(r, k )eikθ , x =

r cos θr sin θ



, (18) for k ∈ Z. Here, ϕ(r, k ) modulates the encoding strength for nearby and distant points. Similarly, in three dimen-sions, we have 

P (ℓ)(x) = ϕ(r, l )Y (ℓ)(θ, ϕ ), x =

r sin θ cos ϕr sin θ sin ϕr cos θ

 ,

(19) for ℓ ∈ Z≥0. Here Y (ℓ) denotes the spherical harmonics of the unit sphere S2 in three dimensions (Byerly, 1893). The steerability property of positional encoding (17) im-plies P(ρ)(0) = 0 for any ρ except for the constant rep-resentation ( k = 0 and ℓ = 0 in two and three dimen-sions, respectively), since P(ρ)(0) = ρ(R)P(ρ)(0) for all 

R ∈ SO( d). This condition can be enforced by setting ϕ to zero when r = 0 . For our experiments, we used 

ϕ(r, ρ ) = wρr−21r> 0,

where wρ is a learnable scalar. This kind of inverse square modulation of the radial component results in positional en-coding assigning higher weight to neighboring points, and the weights decrease as points move further apart (see Fig-ure 2). In our implementation, we have different learnable scalars, not only for different Fourier components, but also for different heads and query dimensions. 

3.3. Multilayer Perceptron 

In a transformer architecture, the self-attention layer is fol-lowed by an MLP, which consists of two linear layers sep-arated by a non-linearity (Vaswani et al., 2017). The linear layers themselves do not affect equivariance as they just mix together the channels for each irrep: 

f out (x, ρ ) = σ



f in (x, ρ )W (ρ)1



W (ρ)2 .

Here, W (ρ)1 , W (ρ)2

> T

∈ Cdmodel ×dhidden , and dhidden represents the hidden dimension between the two linear layers. When selecting the non-linearity σ, it is important to proceed with caution, as commonly used functions like ReLU or sigmoid 6Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

Figure 3: The figure demonstrates the equivariance of attention scores in a trained model. For a fixed pixel xi, we have plotted the maximum attention score for that pixel (max j α(xi, xj )) . The different subfigures represent individual heads. The first and last heads appear to capture the object’s boundary, while the other two heads focus on the object’s body. may break equivariance, as discussed in Section 2.4. For our experiments, we use a Fourier space non-linearity pro-posed by Worrall et al. (2017), where they apply ReLU to the magnitude of the equivariant vectors: 

σ(f (x, ρ )) = ReLU (|| f (x, ρ )|| 2 + b)

|| f (x, ρ )|| 2

f (x, ρ ).

Here, b is a learnable bias. Since the norm of the fea-tures in Fourier space is invariant to rotations, this non-linearity preserves equivariance. Following the convention in Vaswani et al. (2017), we set dhidden = 2 dmodel .

3.4. Layer Normalization 

Another crucial component of the transformer architecture is layer normalization. Notably, the norm of equivariant vectors remains invariant under the Fourier transform, as it preserves the L2 norm. Leveraging this property, we can derive a steerable normalization as LN (f )( x, ρ ) = f (x, ρ )

qP 

> ρ

|| f (x, ρ )|| 22

.

Indeed, the sum over ρ theoretically extends over all irreps of the group, but in practical implementations, it is trun-cated at particular values, which serves as a hyperparameter that can be tuned. This type of normalization was employed in the two dimensional case by Worrall et al. (2017). 

3.5. Complexity 

The computational complexity of a transformer block mainly stems from its self-attention mechanism and MLP. For a sequence of length N and model dimension C, the self-attention mechanism has a complexity of O(N C 2 +

N 2C), and the MLP adds O(N C 2), totaling O(N C 2 +

N 2C). When N ≍ C, this becomes O(N C 2). In steerable self-attention mechanisms, each component effectively has 

dρC channels, leading to a complexity of O(N d 2

> ρ

C2).Analogously, vanilla convolutions in d dimensions, pro-cessing N pixels with C input and output channels with a kernel size kd has a complexity of O(N C 2kd). In steerable convolutions, replacing C with dρC yields O(N d 2

> ρ

C2kd).In summary, with a fixed kernel size, the computational complexity of steerable self-attention matches that of steer-able convolution. Additionally, the increase in complexity from standard to steerable methods is similar for both self-attention mechanisms and convolutions when using many channels and small kernels, as is common in practice. This parallel implies that the additional complexity introduced by steerable methods scales proportionally across both self-attention mechanisms and convolution operations. 

# 4. Experiments 

We evaluate the performance of our steerable transformer architecture in both two and three dimensions. Specifically, we focus on two vision tasks: image classification and se-mantic segmentation. In all experiments, we employed a hybrid architecture that integrates steerable convolutions with steerable transformer, and the trained using the Adam Optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014). The steerable convolution encoder is composed of multi-ple steerable convolution blocks. A steerable convolution block consists of two steerable convolution layers, sepa-rated by non-linearity, and is followed by layer normaliza-tion. Each steerable convolution block is followed by an average pooling layer. In the baseline models for the clas-sification tasks, this encoder is followed by a final convolu-tion layer with a kernel size matching the input size, effec-tively serving as a steerable analogue to a flattening layer. In the steerable transformer model, a steerable transformer with two blocks is inserted before this flattening layer. A norm operation is then applied to enforce invariance to both 7Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

Datasets Model Frequency Cutoff Accuracy / Dice Score Parameter (∼ × 10 6)Avg Runtime Per Batch Train (s) Inference (s) Rotated MNIST Steerable Convolution 

k = 4 98 .72 ±0.02 1.18 0.14 0.08 

k = 8 98 .97 ±0.01 2.54 0.31 0.15 

> Steerable Transformer

k = 4 98 .82 ±0.04 1.13 0.13 0.08 

k = 8 99 .03 ±0.04 2.24 0.30 0.14    

> ModelNet10 (zRotation) (SO (3) Rotation) Steerable Convolution

ℓ = 3 90 .13 ±0.52 1.08 1.22 0.46 86 .62 ±0.25  

> Steerable Transformer

ℓ = 3 90 .40 ±0.25 0.92 1.20 0.45 

86 .80 ±0.58 

> PH2 Steerable Convolution

k = 4 89 .31 ±0.17 0.35 0.27 0.09 

k = 8 89 .63 ±0.30 0.96 0.67 0.19 

> Steerable Transformer

k = 4 90 .61 ±0.90 0.44 0.28 0.10 

k = 8 90 .72 ±0.70 1.22 0.72 0.20  

> BraTS (Enhancing Tumor) (Tumor Core) (Whole Tumor) Steerable Convolution

ℓ = 2 73 .29 ±0.76 

0.12 5.04 1.00 51 .07 ±1.23 

74 .43 ±0.77  

> Steerable Transformer

ℓ = 2 

75 .01 ±0.32 

0.16 5.37 1.01 54 .89 ±0.76 

76 .37 ±0.46 

Table 1: Comparison of steerable transformers and steerable convolutions. The mean and sd are reported for 5 runs. For ModelNet10 we have reported both the z rotation and SO(3) rotation variations. For PH2 dataset we have reported the dice score for segmentation of the binary mask. For the BraTS dataset we have reported the dice score individually for each tumor category. rotation and translation. The output is passed through two fully connected layers, with a ReLU activation in between and a dropout layer with a probability of 0.7 (Marcos et al., 2017). We evaluate performance on two datasets: Rotated MNIST (2D) and ModelNet10 (3D). For the segmentation tasks, we used a U-net architec-ture (Ronneberger et al., 2015), with steerable convolution blocks and average pooling to downsample the input im-age, and a combination of steerable convolution blocks and interpolation to upsample the features back to the input res-olution. The model includes skip connections, where fea-tures from the downsampling path are added to the corre-sponding resolution features in the upsampling path. In the baseline model, an MLP is placed between the downsam-pling and upsampling paths, while in the steerable trans-former model, this is replaced by a steerable transformer with two blocks. We report results on two datasets: PH2 (2D) and BraTS (3D). Table 1 compares the baseline steerable convolutional architecture with the proposed steerable transformer ar-chitecture. For classification tasks, we report accuracy, while for segmentation tasks, we present the dice score for each class (excluding the background). The results in Table 1 demonstrate consistent performance improve-ments with the addition of the steerable transformer en-coder layer across various datasets. For comparisons with other methods, refer to Tables 2 and 3 in Appendix C. Be-low, we briefly describe the datasets used in our experi-ments. Further details regarding the architecture and hy-perparameters are provided in Appendix C. The code for all experiments is available at https://github.com/ SoumyabrataKundu/Steerable-Transformer .

Rotated MNIST: Rotated MNIST, a variant of the orig-inal MNIST dataset (LeCun et al., 2010), includes gray-scale images of handwritten digits with resolution 28 × 28 

that have been randomly rotated. The dataset contains 12,000 training images and 50,000 testing images. 

ModelNet10: The ModelNet10 dataset (Wu et al., 2015) consists of 3D CAD models from 10 common object categories, with a train/test split of 3991 :908 .Each category includes triangular meshes represent-ing objects at various orientations and scales. For our experiments, we used the point cloud version of the dataset available at https://github.com/ antao97/PointCloudDatasets , where the authors employed the farthest point sampling algorithm to sam-ple 2048 points from the surface of each object. These point clouds were then embedded into grids to create vox-elized representations. Additionally, rotated versions of the dataset was generated by applying random rotations using nearest-neighbor interpolation (see Figure 5). 8Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

Figure 4: Illustration of ground truth and predicted segmentation, along with the predicted probability for the true class for two examples from each dataset. The red in the PH2 example represent the binary mask. The red, blue and green in the BraTS dataset represent enhancing tumor, tumor core and whole tumor respectively. 

PH2: The PH2 dataset (Mendonc ¸a et al., 2013) is a col-lection of 200 dermoscopic images used for research in classification and segmentation of skin lesions. We ran-domly split the dataset into 100 :50 :50 for training, testing, and validation, respectively. Each image has a resolution of 578 ×770 with RGB channels, and is accompanied by binary masks of the same resolution that delineate lesion regions. 

BraTS: The Brain Tumor Segmentation (BraTS) dataset (Menze et al., 2015) is used for developing and evaluat-ing algorithms for brain tumor segmentation in MRI scans. It includes pre-operative MRI scans across four modali-ties, with each image having a resolution of 240 ×240 ×155 

and annotated to delineate three tumor regions. We used a train/validation/test split of 243 :96 :145 .

# 5. Limitations 

While transformer architectures offer powerful modeling capabilities, they also present significant computational challenges. The dot product structure in the attention mech-anism can lead to substantial memory consumption, espe-cially when applied to high-resolution images. This lim-its both the size of the network and the batch size dur-ing training, thereby constraining the ability to fully lever-age the potential of attention based models. To address this, scaling up the architecture is crucial for unlocking the full benefits of attention in improving model perfor-mance. In our current experiments, we employed rela-tively modest Fourier cutoffs, which served as a computa-tional compromise. However, we hypothesize that increas-ing these cutoff values could lead to better results. Realiz-ing this improvement within a steerable transformer frame-work would, however, require the model to be scaled up significantly to handle the increased complexity and dimen-sionality of the representation. 

# 6. Conclusion 

The transformer architecture has rapidly gained traction across a wide range of machine learning domains, owing to its remarkable capacity to model long range dependen-cies and contextual relationships within the data. In this work, we present steerable transformers, a novel architec-tural component designed to work in tandem with steer-able convolutions. While convolutions are highly effective at encoding local geometric structures, they are inherently limited in their ability to capture interactions across dis-tant spatial regions. By integrating the transformer’s self-attention mechanism, we create a hybrid architecture that combines the strengths of both local and global represen-tations. Our experimental results demonstrate that this in-tegration leads to measurable performance improvements. Furthermore, the steerable transformer framework holds significant promise for high stakes applications like med-ical imaging, where equivariance to rotations and transla-tions is essential for robust and interpretable analysis. 9Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

# Impact Statement 

This paper contributes to the ongoing advancement of ma-chine learning, with a particular focus on computer vision and the development of equivariant neural network archi-tectures. By introducing novel techniques that respect the symmetries inherent in visual data, our work pushes the boundaries of how neural networks can effectively and ef-ficiently process complex spatial information. Beyond the technical contributions, this research carries the potential for meaningful societal impact. In particular, the proposed architecture can be applied to biomedical imaging, a field where accurate interpretation of spatial patterns is critical. Enhanced models for tasks such as tumor detection, dis-ease classification, and anatomical structure segmentation could significantly improve the capabilities of AI-assisted diagnosis and precision medicine. By enabling more reli-able and interpretable machine learning systems in health-care, our work supports the broader goal of making medical technologies more effective, accessible, and equitable. 

# References 

Anderson, B., Hy, T. S., and Kondor, R. Cormorant: Co-variant molecular neural networks. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., and Bengio, Y. Neural machine translation by jointly learning to align and translate. 

CoRR , abs/1409.0473, 2014. Brock, A., Lim, T., Ritchie, J. M., and Weston, N. Gen-erative and discriminative voxel modeling with convolu-tional neural networks. ArXiv , abs/1608.04236, 2016. Byerly, W. E. An elemenatary treatise on Fourier’s series, and spherical, cylindrical, and ellipsoidal harmonics, with applications to problems in mathematical physics .Dover Publicatiions, 1893. Carion, N., Massa, F., Synnaeve, G., Usunier, N., Kirillov, A., and Zagoruyko, S. End-to-end object detection with transformers. In European conference on computer vi-sion , pp. 213–229. Springer, 2020. Chatzipantazis, E., Pertigkiozoglou, S., Dobriban, E., and Daniilidis, K. $ \mathrm {SE }(3)$-equivariant attention networks for shape reconstruction in function space. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. Chen, N. and Villar, S. Se (3)-equivariant self-attention via invariant features. In Machine Learning for Physics NeurIPS Workshop , 2022. Cohen, T. and Welling, M. Group equivariant convolutional networks. In International conference on machine learn-ing , pp. 2990–2999. PMLR, 2016. Cohen, T. S. and Welling, M. Steerable CNNs. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2017. Cohen, T. S., Geiger, M., Koehler, J., and Welling, M. Spherical CNNs. In International Conference on Learn-ing Representations , 2018. Dosovitskiy, A., Beyer, L., Kolesnikov, A., Weissenborn, D., Zhai, X., Unterthiner, T., Dehghani, M., Minderer, M., Heigold, G., Gelly, S., Uszkoreit, J., and Houlsby, N. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. Dwivedi, V. P. and Bresson, X. A generalization of trans-former networks to graphs. In AAAI Workshop on Deep Learning on Graphs: Methods and Applications , 2020. Frye, C. and Efthimiou, C. J. Spherical harmonics in p dimensions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1205.3548 , 2012. Fuchs, F., Worrall, D., Fischer, V., and Welling, M. Se (3)-transformers: 3d roto-translation equivariant atten-tion networks. Advances in neural information process-ing systems , 33:1970–1981, 2020. Hegde, V. and Zadeh, R. Fusionnet: 3d object classifica-tion using multiple data representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.05695 , 2016. Hutchinson, M. J., Le Lan, C., Zaidi, S., Dupont, E., Teh, Y. W., and Kim, H. Lietransformer: Equivariant self-attention for lie groups. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 4533–4543. PMLR, 2021. Kingma, D. P. and Ba, J. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. CoRR , abs/1412.6980, 2014. Kondor, R. and Trivedi, S. On the generalization of equiv-ariance and convolution in neural networks to the action of compact groups. In Dy, J. and Krause, A. (eds.), Pro-ceedings of the 35th International Conference on Ma-chine Learning , volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pp. 2747–2755. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. Kondor, R., Lin, Z., and Trivedi, S. Clebsch–gordan nets: a fully fourier space spherical convolutional neural net-work. In Bengio, S., Wallach, H., Larochelle, H., Grau-man, K., Cesa-Bianchi, N., and Garnett, R. (eds.), Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 31 , pp. 10117–10126. Curran Associates, Inc., 2018. Laptev, D., Savinov, N., Buhmann, J. M., and Pollefeys, M. Ti-pooling: Transformation-invariant pooling for feature learning in convolutional neural networks. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2016. 10 Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

Larochelle, H., Erhan, D., Courville, A. C., Bergstra, J., and Bengio, Y. An empirical evaluation of deep archi-tectures on problems with many factors of variation. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , 2007. LeCun, Y., Cortes, C., and Burges, C. Mnist hand-written digit database. ATT Labs [Online]. Available: http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist , 2, 2010. Li, J., Chen, B. M., and Lee, G. H. So-net: Self-organizing network for point cloud analysis. In 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion , pp. 9397–9406, 2018. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2018. 00979. Li, J., Bi, Y., and Lee, G. H. Discrete rotation equivariance for point cloud recognition. In 2019 International con-ference on robotics and automation (ICRA) , pp. 7269– 7275. IEEE, 2019. Liao, Y.-L. and Smidt, T. Equiformer: Equivariant graph attention transformer for 3d atomistic graphs. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Repre-sentations , 2023. Liao, Y.-L., Wood, B. M., Das, A., and Smidt, T. Equiformerv2: Improved equivariant transformer for scaling to higher-degree representations. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations ,2024. Marcos, D., Volpi, M., Komodakis, N., and Tuia, D. Rota-tion equivariant vector field networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision ,pp. 5048–5057, 2017. Maturana, D. and Scherer, S. Voxnet: A 3d convolu-tional neural network for real-time object recognition. In 

2015 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , pp. 922–928, 2015. doi: 10.1109/IROS.2015.7353481. Mendonc ¸a, T., Ferreira, P. M., Marques, J., Marcal, A. R. S., and Rozeira, J. Ph2 - a dermoscopic image database for research and benchmarking. In 35th An-nual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC) , pp. 5437– 5440. IEEE, 2013. Menze, B. H., Jakab, A., Bauer, S., Kalpathy-Cramer, J., Farahani, K., and et al., J. K. The multimodal brain tumor image segmentation benchmark (brats). IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , 34(10):1993–2024, 2015. doi: 10.1109/TMI.2014.2377694. Munkres, J. Topology; a First Course . Prentice-Hall, 1974. ISBN 9780139254956. Passaro, S. and Zitnick, C. L. Reducing so (3) convolu-tions to so (2) for efficient equivariant gnns. In Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 27420– 27438. PMLR, 2023. Peter, F. and Weyl, H. Die vollst¨ andigkeit der primi-tiven darstellungen einer geschlossenen kontinuierlichen gruppe. Mathematische Annalen , 97(1):737–755, 1927. Ramachandran, P., Parmar, N., Vaswani, A., Bello, I., Lev-skaya, A., and Shlens, J. Stand-alone self-attention in vision models. In Advances in neural information pro-cessing systems , volume 32, 2019. Robert, A. Introduction to the representation theory of compact and locally compact groups , volume 80. Cam-bridge University Press, 1983. Romero, D., Bekkers, E., Tomczak, J., and Hoogendoorn, M. Attentive group equivariant convolutional networks. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 8188–8199. PMLR, 2020. Romero, D. W. and Cordonnier, J.-B. Group equivariant stand-alone self-attention for vision. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., and Brox, T. U-net: Con-volutional networks for biomedical image segmentation. In Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th international confer-ence, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceed-ings, part III 18 , pp. 234–241. Springer, 2015. Sedaghat, N., Zolfaghari, M., Amiri, E., and Brox, T. Orientation-boosted voxel nets for 3d object recognition. In British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC) 2017 ,2016. Shaw, P., Uszkoreit, J., and Vaswani, A. Self-attention with relative position representations. In North Ameri-can Chapter of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics , 2018. Simonovsky, M. and Komodakis, N. Dynamic edge-conditioned filters in convolutional neural networks on graphs. In 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 29–38, 2017. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.11. Sohn, K. and Lee, H. Learning invariant representations with local transformations. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2012. Thiede, E. H., Hy, T. S., and Kondor, R. The general theory of permutation equivarant neural networks and higher order graph variational encoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.03990 , 2020. 11 Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

Thomas, N., Smidt, T. E., Kearnes, S. M., Yang, L., Li, L., Kohlhoff, K., and Riley, P. F. Tensor field net-works: Rotation- and translation-equivariant neural net-works for 3d point clouds. ArXiv , abs/1802.08219, 2018. Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, Ł., and Polosukhin, I. At-tention is all you need. Advances in neural information processing systems , 30, 2017. Velickovi´ c, P., Cucurull, G., Casanova, A., Romero, A., Li` o, P., and Bengio, Y. Graph attention networks. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations ,2018. Villar, S., Hogg, D. W., Storey-Fisher, K., Yao, W., and Blum-Smith, B. Scalars are universal: Equivariant ma-chine learning, structured like classical physics. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34: 28848–28863, 2021. Wang, R., Albooyeh, M., and Ravanbakhsh, S. Equivari-ant networks for hierarchical structures. In Larochelle, H., Ranzato, M., Hadsell, R., Balcan, M., and Lin, H. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-tems , volume 33, pp. 13806–13817. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. Weiler, M. and Cesa, G. General e (2)-equivariant steer-able cnns. Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. Weiler, M., Geiger, M., Welling, M., Boomsma, W., and Cohen, T. S. 3d steerable cnns: Learning rotationally equivariant features in volumetric data. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 31, 2018a. Weiler, M., Hamprecht, F. A., and Storath, M. Learning steerable filters for rotation equivariant cnns. In Pro-ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , June 2018b. Wigner, E. P. Gruppentheorie und ihre Anwendung auf die Quantenmechanik der Atomspektren , volume 39. Monatsh. f. Mathematik und Physik, 1932. Worrall, D. E. and Brostow, G. J. Cubenet: Equivariance to 3d rotation and translation. In European Conference on Computer Vision , 2018. Worrall, D. E., Garbin, S. J., Turmukhambetov, D., and Brostow, G. J. Harmonic networks: Deep translation and rotation equivariance. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pp. 5028–5037, 2017. Wu, Z., Song, S., Khosla, A., Yu, F., Zhang, L., Tang, X., and Xiao, J. 3d shapenets: A deep representation for vol-umetric shapes. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 1912– 1920, 2015. Xiao, T., Singh, M., Mintun, E., Darrell, T., Doll´ ar, P., and Girshick, R. Early convolutions help transformers see better. Advances in neural information processing sys-tems , 34:30392–30400, 2021. Xu, R., Yang, K., Liu, K., and He, F. e(2) -equivariant vision transformer. In Uncertainty in Artificial Intelli-gence , pp. 2356–2366. PMLR, 2023. 12 Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

# A. Prerequisites 

A.1. Groups Definition: A group G is a non-empty set together with a binary operation (commonly denoted by “ ·”, that combines any two elements a and b of G to form an element of G, denoted a · b, such that the following three requirements, known as group axioms, are satisfied: • Associativity : For all a, b, c ∈ G, one has (a · b) · c = a · (b · c)

• Identity Element : There exists as element e ∈ G such that for every a ∈ G, one has e · a = a · e = a. Such an element is unique. It is called the identity element of the group. • Inverse : For each a ∈ G, there exists an element b ∈ G such that a · b = b · a = e, where e is the identity element. For each a, the element b is unique and it is called the inverse of a and is commonly denoted by a−1.Examples include set of integers Z with the addition operation and the set of non-zero reals R \ { 0} with the multiplication operation. From here on we will drop “ ·”, for simplicity. The group operation will be clear from the elements of the group concerned. 

Group Homomorphism: Given two groups G and H, a function ϕ : G → H is called a group homomorphism if 

ϕ(ab ) = ϕ(a)ϕ(b) for any a, b ∈ G. If the map ϕ is a bijection, it is called an isomorphism . Furthermore, if G = H, then an isomorphism is called automorphism . The set of all automorphisms of a group G with the operation of composition form a group in itself and is denoted by Aut (G).

Compact Groups: A topological group is a topological space that is also a group such that the group operation and the inverse map are continuous. A compact group is a topological group whose topology realizes it as a compact topological space (see (Munkres, 1974) for definition of compact topological spaces). Some classic examples of compact groups are the groups SO( d) (the group of all real orthogonal matrices in d dimensions with determinant 1), U (d) (the group of all complex unitary matrices) and SU (d) (the group of all complex unitary matrices with determinant 1). 

Special Orthonormal Group SO( d): This group comprises all real orthogonal matrices in d dimensions with a determinant of 1. These groups are associated with rotation matrices in d dimensions. in two dimensions, the group SO(2) can be parametrized by a single angle θ corresponding to the rotation matrix 

R(θ) = 

 cos( θ) sin( θ)

− sin( θ) cos( θ).



Here, R(θ) signifies rotation in the x-y plane by an angle θ ∈ [0 , 2π). In three dimensions, the group SO(3) can be parameterized using the so called Euler angles . Consider the rotation matrices Rz (α) and Ry (β), defined by 

Rz (α) = 



cos( α) − sin( α) 0sin( α) cos( α) 00 0 1

 , Ry (β) = 



cos( β) 0 sin( β)0 1 0

− sin( β) 0 cos( β)

 ,

which represent rotations by angles α and β about the z-axis and y-axis, respectively. Using the z-y-z convention, any rotation matrix R ∈ SO(3) can be expressed as R = Rz (α)Ry (β)Rz (γ), where α, γ ∈ [0 , 2π) and β ∈ [0 , π ) are the Euler angles. 

Semi-direct Product Groups: Given two groups N and H and a group homomorphism ϕ : H → Aut (N ), we can construct a new group N ⋊ϕ H defined as follows: • The underlying set is the Cartesian product N × H.• The group operation is given by (n1, h 1)( n2, h 2) = ( n1ϕh1 (n2), h 1h2).13 Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

Special Euclidean Group SE (d): The Special Euclidean group SE (d) consists of all combinations of rotations and transla-tions in d dimensions. Translations in Rd form a group isomorphic to Rd itself, while rotations are represented by the group 

SO( d). We define a group homomorphism ϕ : SO( d) → Aut (Rd) by setting ϕR(t) = Rt, which describes how a rotation acts on a translation vector. Using this, the group SE (d) can be constructed as the semidirect product Rd ⋊ϕ SO( d). The group operation for two elements (t1, R 1) and (t2, R 2) in SE (d) is given by 

(t1, R 1)( t2, R 2) = ( t1 + R1t2, R 1R2).

The identity element of SE (d) is (0, I ), and the inverse of an element (t, R ) is given by (t, R )−1 = ( −R−1t, R −1).

A.2. Group Actions Definition: If G is a group with identity element e, and X is a set, then a (left) group action of G on X is a function 

α : G × X → X, that satisfies the following two axioms for all g, h ∈ G and x ∈ X:• Identity : α(e, x ) = x,• Compatibility : α(g, α (h, x )) = α(gh, x ).Often α(g, x ) is shortened to g · x. Any group G acts on itself by the group operation. If G acts on X, then it also naturally acts on any function f defined on X, as (g · f )( x) = f (g−1 · x).

Action of SE( d) on Rd: The special Euclidean group acts on a vector in Rd by first applying the rotation component followed by translation. For x ∈ Rd and (t, R ) ∈ SE( d),

(t, R ) · x = Rx + t

gives us the action of SE( d) on Rd.

A.3. Group Representations Definition: A representation of a group G is a group homomorphism from G to GL (Cn) (group of invertible linear maps on Cn). Here n is called the dimension of the representation, which can possibly be infinite. A representation is unitary if 

ρ maps to unitary linear transformation of Cn.

Irreducible Representations: If we have two representations, ρ1 and ρ2 of dimensions n1 and n2 respectively, then the two can be combined by a direct sum to give another representation of dimension n1 + n2,

ρ1(g) ⊕ ρ2(g) = 

ρ1(g) 00 ρ2(g)



.

A representation is said to be completely reducible if it can be expressed as a direct sum of other representations after maybe a change of basis, i.e, 

U ρ (g)U −1 = M

> i

ρi(g)

where U is a unitary change of basis matrix and the direct sum extends over some number of representations. However, for every group there are a some representations which cannot be broken further into a direct sum of other representations. These are called the irreducible representations or irreps of the group. These irreps are the building blocks of the all other representations of the group, in the sense that any representation can be written as a direct sum of the irreps: 

ρ(g) = U

"M

> i

ρ(i)(g)

#

U −1,

where again U is a change of basis matrix and ρ(i) are the irreps. The Peter–Weyl Theorem by (Peter & Weyl, 1927) tells us that for a compact group G, any unitary representation ρ is completely reducible and splits into direct sum of irreducible 

finite dimensional unitary representations of G.14 Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

Irreducible Representations of SO(2) and SO(3) : SO( d) being a compact group, all its irreps are finite dimensional unitary representations. In the case of SO(2) , every irrep is one-dimensional and indexed by an integer. The group SO(2) 

can be parameterized by an angle θ ∈ [0 , 2π), corresponding to a rotation in the x-y plane by θ radians. Under this parameterization, the irreps of SO(2) take the form 

ρ(k)(θ) = eikθ , k ∈ Z.

The irreps of SO(3) are indexed by positive integers ℓ ∈ Z≥0, where the ℓ’th representation is of dimension 2ℓ + 1 and are given by the so called Wigner D-matrices (Wigner, 1932): 

ρ(ℓ)(R) = D(ℓ)(R), ℓ ∈ Z≥0.

A.4. Fourier Transform Haar Measure: There is, up to a positive multiplicative constant, a unique countably additive, nontrivial measure μ on the Borel subsets of G satisfying the following properties: • μ is left-translation-invariant: μ(gS ) = μ(S) for every g ∈ G and all Borel sets S ⊆ G.• μ is finite on every compact set: μ(K) < ∞ for all compact K ⊆ G.• μ is outer regular on Borel sets S ⊆ G: μ(S) = inf {μ(U ) : S ⊆ U, U open }.

• μ is inner regular on open sets U ⊆ G: μ(U ) = sup {μ(K) : K ⊆ U, K compact }.

Fourier Transform on Compact groups: A notable and useful property of compact groups is that the set of (iso-morphism classes of) their irreps is countable (Robert, 1983). This fact underpins a powerful generalization of classical Fourier analysis to the setting of compact groups, enabling square-integrable functions to be decomposed into frequency components indexed by group representations. Let f ∈ L 2(G), where L2(G) denotes the space of complex-valued, square-integrable functions on G with respect to the (normalized) Haar measure. For each irrep ρ, the Fourier transform of f at ρ

is defined as 

bf (ρ) = 

Z

> G

f (g) ρ(g) dμ (g),

where bf (ρ) is a complex matrix of size dρ × dρ. The inverse Fourier transform allows one to reconstruct the original function f from its Fourier coefficients via the formula 

f (g) = X

> ρ

dρ Tr 

 bf (ρ) ρ(g)†

,

where the convergence is in the L2-sense. This formula is justified by the Peter—Weyl theorem, which states that the matrix coefficients of all irreps form a complete orthonormal basis for L2(G). Consequently, any square integrable function on G

can be expressed as a (generalized) Fourier series in terms of these basis functions. 15 Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

# B. Proof of Theorem 1 

Proof. Throughout the proof we will assume a single input channel (dmodel = 1) . Fix (t, R ) ∈ SE( d). By equation (6), under the action of (t, R )−1, any input f in transforms as 

f in (x) 7 → [( t, R )−1 · f in ]( x) = ρ(R)†f in (Rx + t).

Analogously, the query, key and value vectors in equations (10)-(12) transform as 

q(ρ)(x) 7 → [( t, R )−1 · f in ]( x)W(ρ) 

> Q

= ρ(R)†f in (Rx + t)W(ρ) 

> Q

= ρ(R)†q(ρ)(Rx + t) (20) 

k(ρ)(x, y) 7 → [( t, R )−1 · f in ]( x)W(ρ) 

> K

+ P(ρ)(x, y) = ρ(R)†f in (Rx + t)W(ρ) 

> K

+ P(ρ)(x, y) (21) 

v(ρ)(x, y) 7 → [( t, R )−1 · f in ]( x)W(ρ) 

> V

+ P(ρ)(x, y) = ρ(R)†f in (Rx + t)W(ρ) 

> V

+ P(ρ)(x, y), (22) respectively. The score function s is computed using a scaled dot product. Using the fact that ρ is unitary, the score function transforms as 

s(x, y)= X

> ρ

d−1/2 

> K

vec 



q(ρ)(x)

†

vec 



k(ρ)(x, y)



(by equation (13) )

7→ X

> ρ

d−1/2 

> K

vec 



ρ(R)†q(ρ)(Rx + t)

†

vec 



ρ(R)†f in (Rx + t)W(ρ) 

> K

+ P(ρ)(x, y)



(by equation (20) -(21) )= X

> ρ

d−1/2

> K



ρ(R)†q(ρ)(Rx + t)

† 

ρ(R)†f in (Rx + t)W(ρ) 

> K

+ P(ρ)(x, y)



(since we assumed dmodel = 1) = X

> ρ

d−1/2 

> K

q(ρ)(Rx + t)†ρ(R)ρ(R)†f in (Rx + t)W(ρ) 

> K

+ d−1/2 

> K

q(ρ)(Rx + t)†ρ(R)P(ρ)(x, y)= X

> ρ

d−1/2 

> K

q(ρ)(Rx + t)†f in (Rx + t)W(ρ) 

> K

+ d−1/2 

> K

q(ρ)(Rx + t)†ρ(R)P(ρ)(x, y)(since ρ(R) is unitary )= X

> ρ

d−1/2 

> K

q(ρ)(Rx + t)† 

f in (Rx + t)W(ρ) 

> K

+ P(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t)



+ X

> ρ

d−1/2 

> K

q(ρ)(Rx + t)† h

ρ(R)P(ρ)(x, y) − P(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t)

i

= X

> ρ

d−1/2 

> K

q(ρ)(Rx + t)†k(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) + X

> ρ

d−1/2 

> K

q(ρ)(Rx + t)†∆(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t)(by equation (11) )= X

> ρ

d−1/2 

> K

vec 



q(ρ)(Rx + t)

†

vec 



k(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t)



+ X

> ρ

d−1/2 

> K

q(ρ)(Rx + t)†∆(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t)(since we assumed dmodel = 1) =s(Rx + t, R y + t) + X

> ρ

d−1/2 

> K

q(ρ)(Rx + t)†∆(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t), (23) 

(by equation (13) )

where ∆(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) := ρ(R)P(ρ)(x, y) − P(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t). The attention scores are obtained by taking the softmax of the scores (23). Therefore, the attention scores transform as 

α(x, y)

16 Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

= exp ( |s(x, y)|)

R  

> Ω( fin )

exp ( |s(x, z)|) dz

(by equation (14) )

7→

exp 



s(Rx + t, R y + t) + P 

> ρ

d−1/2 

> K

q(ρ)(Rx + t)†∆(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t)

R  

> Ω(( t,R )−1·fin )

exp 



s(Rx + t, R z + t) + P 

> ρ

d−1/2 

> K

q(ρ)(Rx + t)†∆(ρ)(Rx + t, R z + t)



dz

(by equation (23) )=exp 



s(Rx + t, R y + t) + P 

> ρ

d−1/2 

> K

q(ρ)(Rx + t)†∆(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t)

R  

> (t,R )−1·Ω( fin )

exp 



s(Rx + t, R z + t) + P 

> ρ

d−1/2 

> K

q(ρ)(Rx + t)†∆(ρ)(Rx + t, R z + t)



dz

. (24) 

(if Ω( f in ) is the support of f in , then (t, R )−1 · Ω( f in ) is the support of (t, R )−1 · f in )

Define the expression in (24) as β(Rx + t, R y + t). Using these attention scores, the output of the attention mechanism 

f out , for any input f in , transforms as 

f out (x)=

Z 

> Ω( fin )

α(x, y)v(ρ)(x, y) dy

(by equation (15) )

7→

Z 

> (t,R )−1·Ω( fin )

β(Rx + t, R y + t)

h

ρ(R)†f in (Rx + t)W(ρ) 

> V

+ P(ρ)(x, y)

i

dy

(by equation (22) )=ρ(R)†

Z 

> (t,R )−1·Ω( fin )

β(Rx + t, R y + t)

h

f in (Rx + t)W(ρ) 

> V

+ P(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t)

i

dy

+

Z 

> (t,R )−1·Ω( fin )

β(Rx + t, R y + t)

h

P(ρ)(x, y) − ρ(R)†P(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t)

i

dy

=ρ(R)†

Z 

> (t,R )−1·Ω( fin )

β(Rx + t, R y + t)v(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) dy

+ ρ(R)†

Z 

> (t,R )−1·Ω( fin )

β(Rx + t, R y + t)∆ (ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) dy. (25) 

(by equation (12) and definition of ∆(ρ))

According to the statement of the proposition, the output f out should transform as 

f out (x, ρ ) 7 → ρ(R)†f out (Rx + t, ρ ) = ρ(R)†

Z 

> Ω( fin )

α(Rx + t, y)v(ρ)(Rx + t, y) dy

= ρ(R)†

Z 

> (t,R )−1·Ω( fin )

α(Rx + t, R y + t)v(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) dy. (26) The transformations in (25) and (26) are equivalent iff 

Z 

> (t,R )−1·Ω( fin )

β(Rx + t, R y + t)v(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) dy +

Z 

> (t,R )−1·Ω( fin )

β(Rx + t, R y + t)∆ (ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) dy

=

Z 

> (t,R )−1·Ω( fin )

α(Rx + t, R y + t)v(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) dy (27) for all inputs f in , and for all weights W (ρ) 

> Q

, W (ρ) 

> K

, W (ρ) 

> V

for all irreps ρ. Note that, if ∆(ρ) ≡ 0 for all irreps ρ, then α ≡ β

by equation (24) and hence, the equality in (27) holds for all f in , W (ρ) 

> Q

, W (ρ) 

> K

, W (ρ) 

> V

. Conversely, suppose the equality (27) 17 Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

holds for any f in , W (ρ) 

> Q

, W (ρ) 

> K

, W (ρ) 

> V

. In particular, setting W (ρ) 

> Q

= 0 , by equations (20) and (24), we get α ≡ β ∝ 1, and therefore equation (27) implies 

Z 

> (t,R )−1·Ω( fin )

α(Rx + t, R y + t)v(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) dy +

Z 

> (t,R )−1·Ω( fin )

α(Rx + t, R y + t)∆ (ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) dy

=

Z 

> (t,R )−1·Ω( fin )

α(Rx + t, R y + t)v(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) dy

=⇒

Z 

> (t,R )−1·Ω( fin )

α(Rx + t, R y + t)∆ (ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) dy = 0 =⇒

Z 

> (t,R )−1·Ω( fin )

∆(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) dy = 0 . (28) 

(since α ∝ 1) 

The equality in (28) holds for any compactly supported f in . In particular, consider a class of functions supported on a ball of radius 1/n around Ry0 + t, with n ∈ N and a fixed y0 ∈ Rd, denoted by B1/n (Ry0 + t). Then, setting 

Ω( f in ) = B1/n (Ry0 + t) in (28), we have 

Z

> (t,R )−1·B1/n (Ry0+t)

∆(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) dy = 0 for all n ∈ N

=⇒

Z

> B1/n (y0)

∆(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) dy = 0 for all n ∈ N

=⇒ 1

|B1/n (y0)|

Z

> B1/n (y0)

∆(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) dy = 0 for all n ∈ N

=⇒ lim 

> n→∞

1

|B1/n (y0)|

Z

> B1/n (y0)

∆(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) dy = 0 =⇒ ∆(ρ)(Rx + t, R y0 + t) = 0 . (29) 

(using continuity of P(ρ) and Lemma 1) 

Since y0 ∈ Rd was arbitrarily fixed, the equality in (29) hold for all y0 ∈ Rd. Hence, the equality in (27) holds iff 

P(ρ)(Rx + t, R y + t) = ρ(R)P(ρ)(x, y).

for all x, y ∈ Rd and irreps ρ. Since (t, R ) ∈ SE( d) was chosen arbitrarily, the result holds for all (t, R ) ∈ SE( d), which completes the proof. 

Lemma 1. Suppose f : Rd → Cp is a function continuous at x0 ∈ Rd. Let Br (x0), defined as 

Br (x0) := {x ∈ Rd : ∥x0 − x∥2 ≤ r},

denote a ball of radius r around x0. Then, 

lim 

> r→0

1

|Br (x0)|

Z 

> Br(x0)

f (x) dx = f (x0)

where |Br (x0)| is the Lebesgue measure of Br (x0).Proof. By continuity of f at x0, for ε > 0, there exists δ > 0 such that, for any 0 ≤ r ≤ δ

|| f (x0) − f (x)|| 2 ≤ ε (30) for all x ∈ Br (x0). Therefore, we have 

1

|Br (x0)|

Z 

> Br(x0)

f (x) dx − f (x0)

> 2

= 1

|Br (x0)|

Z 

> Br(x0)

f (x) − f (x0) dx

> 2

18 Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

≤ 1

|Br (x0)|

Z 

> Br(x0)

|| f (x) − f (x0)|| 2 dx

≤ 1

|Br (x0)|

Z 

> Br(x0)

ε d x

(by equation (30) )= ε. (31) The inequality in (31) holds for 0 ≤ r ≤ δ. Hence, 

lim 

> r→0

1

|Br (x0)|

Z 

> Br(x0)

f (x) dx − f (x0)

> 2

= 0 .

# C. Experiment Details 

In this section, we provide additional details on the datasets, architectural variations, and hyperparameters for all experi-ments conducted in this work. 

C.1. Rotated MNIST 

Type Method Error% Parameters Miscellaneous SVM (Larochelle et al., 2007) 11 .11 −

TIRBM (Sohn & Lee, 2012) 4.2 −

TI-Pooling (Laptev et al., 2016) 1.2 −

> Equivariant Convolution

P4CNN (Cohen & Welling, 2016) 2.28 25 kHarmonic Net (Worrall et al., 2017) 1.69 33 kRotEqNet (Marcos et al., 2017) 1.09 −

Weiler et al. (Weiler et al., 2018b) 0.71 6ME2CNN (Weiler & Cesa, 2019) 0.69 6M

> Equivariant Attention

α-R4 CNN (Romero et al., 2020) 1.69 73 kGSA-Nets (Romero & Cordonnier, 2021) 2.03 44 kGE-ViT (Xu et al., 2023) 1.99 44 kOur ( k = 4 ) 1.18 1.13 MOur ( k = 8 ) 0.97 2.24 MTable 2: Comparison of the performance of the equivariant attentive architecture on the Rotated MNIST dataset. The network architecture in this experiment consists of three convolutional blocks with progressively increasing numbers of channels. These blocks are separated by average pooling layers, which down-sample the feature maps to improve com-putational efficiency. The output is flattened and passed through fully connected layers that apply linear transformations, batch normalization, ReLU activation, and dropout to prevent overfitting. The final layer maps the output to ten classes. In the case of the steerable transformer, a transformer block with a single layer follows the convolutional blocks. The networks were trained using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014), starting with a learning rate of 5 × 10 −3,which was reduced by a factor of 0.5 every 20 epochs, along with a weight decay of 5 × 10 −4 for 150 epochs. A batch size of 25 was used, and training the largest model took 4 hours on a 16GB GPU. Table 2 compares the performance of the steerable transformers with other attention-based methods reported for this dataset. Our approach significantly outperforms the other attention-based methods, which are standalone, while ours is built on top of convolutions. The only methods that surpass our results, by Weiler et al. (2018b) and Weiler & Cesa (2019), use a Fourier cutoff of 16, while we use a cutoff of 8. We believe this accounts for the performance difference, which is due to implementation and resource limitations, as higher Fourier cutoffs lead to out-of-memory issues. 19 Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

Figure 5: Examples from the ModelNet10 dataset are shown in various formats: point cloud, voxel representa-tion, and rotated perturbations of voxels. Method Accuracy Parameters (∼ × 10 6)Point Cloud  ECC (Simonovsky & Komodakis, 2017) 90.8 -SO-Net (Li et al., 2018) 93.9 2.5 Rot-SO-Net (Li et al., 2019) 94.5 2.5 Voxel 3D ShapeNets (Wu et al., 2015) 83.5 12 VRN (Brock et al., 2016) 91.3 18 VoxNet (Maturana & Scherer, 2015) 92.0 0.92 FusionNet (Hegde & Zadeh, 2016) 93.1 120 ORION (Sedaghat et al., 2016) 93.8 0.91 Cubenet (Worrall & Brostow, 2018) 94.6 4.5 Our 91.1 0.92 Table 3: Comparison of performance on ModelNet10 with z rotation pertur-bation. Other methods used both train and test time augmentation, while we applied augmentation only during test time, not during training. 

C.2. ModelNet10 

The point cloud data with 2048 points is available at https://github.com/antao97/PointCloudDatasets .Similar to the Rotated MNIST experiment, we utilized three convolutional blocks. The features for each irrep are in a 

1 : 1 : 1 : 1 ratio. The number of features per irrep increases with each convolutional block, and the data is downsampled using average pooling. For the steerable transformer, this convolutional encoder is supplemented with a transformer block containing a single transformer layer. After an additional normalization step, the output is flattened and passed through fully connected layers that reduce the dimensionality to 128 features. To ensure training stability and prevent overfitting, batch normalization, ReLU activation, and dropout are applied, with the final output layer classifying the data into ten classes. The networks were trained using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014), with an initial learning rate of 1 × 10 −3,which decreased by a factor of 0.5 every 20 epochs, for a total of 50 epochs. A batch size of 5 was used, and training the largest model took 12 hours on a 16GB GPU. Table 3 compares our method to other non-attention-based methods on the z-rotated version of the dataset. Unlike our approach, which does not use augmentation during training, all other methods were trained with augmentation involving 12 uniformly stratified rotations along the z-axis. To ensure a fair comparison, we applied test-time augmentation by averaging the accuracy of all 12 predictions for each test data point. Despite not using train-time augmentation and having fewer parameters, our method achieves performance comparable to these other methods. 

C.3. PH2 

The data for the experiment is available at https://www.fc.up.pt/addi/ph2%20database.html . The net-work begins with two convolutional blocks, each composed of steerable convolutional layers, non-linearities, and batch normalization, which progressively downsample the input and extract relevant features. Then, a transformer encoder is used to capture global dependencies in the data. After this, the model uses two convolutional blocks to upsample and refine the extracted features. In between each block, the features are upsampled using bilinear interpolation. Finally, the features are restored to the original resolutions. In the final step, the vector norm is computed, converting the complex-valued feature maps into real values to produce the logits of each class. The networks were trained using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014), starting with an initial learning rate of 1×10 −2,which decreased by a factor of 0.5 every 20 epochs, for a total of 100 epochs. We used a batch size of 1, and training the largest model took 2 hours on a 16GB GPU. A larger batch size could not be used due to out-of-memory errors. 20 Steerable Transformers for Volumetric Data 

Figure 6: More segmented examples from the test datasets of PH2 and BraTS. 

C.4. BraTS 

The data for the experiment is available at http://medicaldecathlon.com/ . Only the training data is available for this task, consisting of 484 images. We split this dataset into training, validation, and test sets for our experiments. The network begins with two convolutional stem blocks that use steerable convolutions to extract multi-resolution features. These blocks include non-linearities and batch normalization for stable training, as well as average pooling layers for downsampling. The features for each irrep are in a ratio of 8:4:2, with the number of features increasing in subsequent layers according to this ratio. The encoded features are then passed through a transformer encoder, which captures long-range dependencies and spatial relationships using multiple layers and positional encodings. The decoder consists of convolutional head blocks and trilinear interpolation kernel that upsample the features. The final output is generated by taking the absolute value of these complex features, corresponding to the constant representation. The networks were trained using the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014), with an initial learning rate of 1 × 10 −2,which was reduced by a factor of 0.5 every 20 epochs, for a total of 100 epochs. A batch size of 1 was used, and training the largest model took 40 hours on a 16GB GPU. A larger batch size could not be used due to out-of-memory errors. 21