Title: Learning Terrain-Adaptive Humanoid Locomotion on Granular Terrain

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.10286v1

Published Time: Thu, 10 Sep 2026 01:32:16 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
> 1

# Learning Terrain-Adaptive Humanoid Locomotion on Granular Terrain 

Junnosuke Kamohara 1, Feiyang Wu 1, Andy Ningan Zong 1,Daniel I. Goldman 2, Yashwanth Nakka 1, Seth Hutchinson 3, Ye Zhao 1

Abstract —Humanoid locomotion on granular terrain remains a significant challenge due to its complex foot-terrain interaction dynamics that are difficult to model. Existing approaches either ignore granular contact dynamics or incorporate simplified normal force models with heuristic tangential components. In this work, we present a physics-grounded granular contact model based on three-dimensional resistive force theory (3D RFT) and efficiently simulate granular terrain for reinforcement learning (RL) training. Unlike traditional rigid contact models and simpli-fied granular contact models with ad-hoc heuristics, our contact solver produces physically accurate granular intrusion dynamics without resorting to heuristics. It captures realistic penetration and tangential drag during training, enabling the policy to learn behaviors that transfer reliably to real-world granular terrain where rigid contact models fail. To adapt to varying terrain conditions, we train a terrain-adaptive locomotion controller via teacher-student RL, using a variational autoencoder to encode terrain information into a compact latent representation. Simu-lation studies using material point method (MPM) with NVIDIA Newton demonstrate that our method generalizes to unseen granular terrains, achieves a significantly higher success rate than baselines, and demonstrates zero-shot terrain identification and adaptation. We further validate our approach through ex-tensive hardware experiments across diverse real-world granular terrains including basalt, dry sand, and beach sand. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration of agile hu-manoid locomotion on real-world granular terrain. Project page: https://humanoid-gm-locomotion.github.io/HUMANOID-GM/ 

Index Terms —Humanoid robots, granular terrain, terrain estimation, reinforcement learning 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

# ROBUST and versatile locomotion is essential for legged systems to operate reliably across diverse real-world environments. Among the most challenging settings for field deployment is deformable granular terrain, including sand, gravel, and loose soil, which are common in outdoor, unstruc-tured environments. Unlike rigid ground, granular media ex-hibit complex multi-phase behavior, acting as either a solid or a fluid depending on loading conditions. This produces large, highly nonlinear contact forces that are difficult to model, making balancing and walking control substantially harder. Locomotion on granular terrain therefore remains a significant open problem for legged robots. Existing approaches fall into two broad categories. Model-based methods incorporate terradynamics into stable gait planning [1], [2] or constraints in 

> 1

Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Machines, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA {jkamohara3, nzong8, feiyangwu, cli895, ynakka3, yezhao }@gatech.edu 

> 2

School of Physics, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA daniel.goldman@physics.gatech.edu 

> 3

Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA 

s.hutchinson@northeastern.edu 

Digital Object Identifier (DOI): see top of this page. 

Figure 1: The figure illustrates deployment of our policy on real-world granular terrains. Terrain corresponds to basalt (left), dry sand (center), and beach sand (right). 

trajectory optimization [3], [4], while learning-based methods train policies in simulation with domain randomization [5]–[8] or explicit granular contact models [9], [10]. Model-based approaches tackle granular terrain through terradynamics, most notably resistive force theory (RFT) [11]– [13] and its variants [14], which provide physically grounded models of leg and wheel intrusion in granular media. These models have been embedded into the control of 1-D hop-pers [3], [4] and bipedal robots [1], [2], [15]. For hoppers, RFT has been integrated into trajectory optimization for im-pulsive jumping [3] and used to estimate ground reaction forces online [4]. For bipedal walkers, RFT provides stabil-ity criteria in hybrid zero dynamics [1] and zero-moment-point methods [2]. Chen et al. estimate cost of transport from intrusion dynamics to evaluate the energy efficiency of bipedal locomotion [15]. However, these methods have primarily been validated on small-scale robots in simplified laboratory settings. Their reliance on deterministic dynamics, predefined contact sequences, and limited modeling fidelity reduces robustness against the large perturbations typical of outdoor granular terrain, such as unexpected sinkage and foot slip. Learning-based approaches, particularly reinforcement learning (RL), have shown strong potential for robust locomotion. A representative line of work achieves robust locomotion through domain randomization and privileged learning without explicitly modeling terrain dynamics [5]–[8]. These approaches do not capture granular contact behavior, relying instead on exhaustive domain randomization over rigid-contact dynamics. To address this problem, recent work has incorporated granular contact models directly into the RL training environment [9], [10]. Prior work stitches together separate force model for normal-direction and tangential heuristics, whereas ours uses a single, experimentally validated 3D contact model with consistent physical grounding. This yields a more physically grounded contact model that remains applicable across diverse real-world arXiv:2609.10286v1 [cs.RO] 9 Sep 2026 2

granular materials. Real-world granular materials vary widely in mechanical properties, so a policy must adapt its motion to the terrain to remain robust. Since terrain properties such as stiffness are not directly observable, we train the policy via teacher-student reinforcement learning with a learned terrain encoder. The teacher policy has access to the ground-truth terrain stiffness, which the encoder compresses into a compact latent that conditions the policy. The teacher is then distilled into a deployable student policy that infers the terrain latent from proprioceptive history alone, enabling the policy to adapt its motion to the inferred terrain conditions at deployment time. In summary, our key contributions are:  

> •

Integration of a three-dimensional granular contact model based on 3D RFT into the simulation pipeline.  

> •

A terrain-adaptive locomotion policy that produces adap-tive swing foot clearance and gait frequency under chang-ing terrain stiffness.  

> •

Demonstration of dynamic multi-gait humanoid locomo-tion, including circular walking, running, and jumping over simulation and real-world granular terrain. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Granular Contact Modeling 

Accurately modeling robot-foot-terrain interaction on gran-ular media remains an open problem. Mainstream rigid-body simulators [16], [17] assume non-penetrating contact, which fails to capture severe sinkage and slippage caused by granular terrain. Particle-based methods such as the discrete element method (DEM) [18] explicitly model inter-grain interactions and offer high simulation fidelity. However, their computa-tional cost prohibits use in online control or policy training, restricting them to small-scale offline analysis. Continuum-based methods such as the material point method (MPM) [19] offer improved efficiency by discretizing the material on a spatial grid. Nevertheless, it still solves contact forces on a high-resolution spatial grid, which is computationally burden-some to scale for larger terrains and thousands of parallel simulations necessary for RL training. To reduce computa-tional cost, a variety of simplified contact models have been proposed, including spring-damper compliant models [20], linear viscoelastic models [21], [22], and rate-dependent plas-tic models [23], [24]. However, they oversimplify the fluidic nature of granular mechanics and poorly align with real-world granular behavior. In this work, we propose to incorporate Resistive force theory (RFT) [11]–[13], [25] into the granular media contact model. RFT is a force model for arbitrarily-shaped bodies that captures the resistive forces between an intruding body and granular media. It computes the quasistatic reaction force on an intruding body as a function of the body’s velocity angle, body orientation, and penetration depth. Since RFT retains an analytical structure with parameters fit from intrusion experiments, it is a middle ground between simplified contact models and high-fidelity particle-based models. 

B. Legged Locomotion on Deformable Surface 

The robotics community has explored model-based and learning-based approaches to legged locomotion on granular terrain. Model-based approaches incorporate granular contact models either as gait and contact force constraints or as system dynamics in trajectory optimization (TO) [1]–[4]. For example, a few works define moment constraints by estimating the stability region of a linear inverted pendulum and imposing it in hybrid zero dynamics optimization [1], while others synthesize stable gaits via zero moment point methods [2]. Other approaches embed terrain dynamics into TO, such as incorporating a terrain model into hopper dynamics for impulsive jumping on granular media [3] or learning ground reaction forces online via Gaussian processes [4]. Despite re-cent progress on locomotion over mud [26] and dry sand [14], model-based methods generally suffer from model mismatch and remain primarily validated on low-dimensional robots in simplified laboratory settings. Learning-based methods, particularly reinforcement learn-ing (RL), offer a promising alternative. A representative ap-proach relies on domain randomization and privileged learning without explicitly modeling intricate terrain dynamics [5]–[8]. These methods have demonstrated robust locomotion across natural terrain. Fundamentally, these methods mitigate the model mismatch between a rigid contact model and granular terrain through exhaustive domain randomization, rather than principled deformable contact modeling. To explicitly model granular contact dynamics, recent work incorporates granular media dynamics into the simulation pipeline during policy training. Previous works utilize quasistatic RFT [11] or a jammed granular cone model [9] to describe granular intrusion dynamics in the normal direction for quadrupedal locomotion, and a similar approach applies to bipedal locomotion on a soft mattress [10]. However, these methods rely on a normal force model and supplement it with heuristic components such as Coulomb friction and spring-damper models for tangential forces, introducing ad-hoc design choices not grounded in granular contact physics. In this work, we develop a granular terrain contact model derived entirely from 3D RFT without resorting to heuristics, integrate it into IsaacLab [17] to enable granular media simulation in a mainstream robotics simulator, and evaluate policy in Newton’s MPM simulation [19], [27]. Furthermore, with this full 3D contact model, we focus on agile humanoid locomotion on granular terrain, including running and jumping, which remains largely unexplored in prior work. 

C. Terrain-Adaptive Locomotion 

Field deployment of humanoid robots often requires the robot to adjust foot clearance and gait cycle to remain robust under varying terrain conditions. Recent works have shown the effectiveness of latent variable representations for terrain-adaptive locomotion [6], [10], [28]. Other works estimate robot states [9], [10], [29] and terrain properties [5] as auxiliary tasks to improve locomotion robustness. By concurrently train-ing estimator networks that predict quantities such as foot clearance, contact probability, and base height, these methods adapt the policy to rough terrain. Miki et al. reconstruct terrain height and the friction coefficient as auxiliary tasks to enable terrain-adaptive policies [5]. The training pipeline follows a 3Granular Media     

> Finite Element ground Coordinate System
> Force Data Contact Wrench material param. resistive force
> Figure 2: Granular terrain contact model definition. The terrain model predicts contact force Fand moment Mbased on the intruder’s penetration depth, velocity angle, and orientation.

teacher-student RL framework that leverages an expert teacher to guide a student with a restricted observation space [5]–[7], [30]. In this work, we adopt a terrain parameter estimation approach with teacher-student RL. We concurrently train a teacher policy and a terrain encoder with proprioception and privileged information including ground truth robot states and terrain material properties. Then, we distill the teacher policy into a student network that takes only proprioceptive history. Unlike prior works, our approach recovers terrain stiffness from proprioception. We demonstrate that this architecture en-ables terrain-adaptive behaviors including swing foot clearance modulation on soft granular surfaces. III. P RELIMINARIES 

We utilize 3D RFT [13] to model the contact forces between the humanoid foot and the granular terrain. RFT assumes that the contact force on an intruding body is the sum of forces per area per depth α acting on infinitesimal elements: F =R 

> S

α|z|1z< 0dS where z is the foot height relative to the terrain surface (negative when penetrating) and S is the surface area, as demonstrated in Fig. 2. Thus, we first derive the contact force and moment acting on each finite element. Force per area per depth α (or resistive force) on a finite element is computed as follows: 

α = ρcgf (˜ μ)G(en, ev , eg ) (1) where ρc is the effective material density, g is the gravitational constant, ˜μ is the internal coefficient of friction, en is the surface normal vector, ev is the local velocity direction vector, and eg is the gravity vector. ξ = ρcgf (˜ μ) represents the media-dependent scaling coefficient reflecting the intrusive strength of the medium, f (˜ μ) is a scaling coefficient depending on the internal coefficient of friction ˜μ, and G(en, ev , eg ) is the generic RFT function expressed as G = c1en + c2ev + c3eg .We use f (˜ μ) = 894˜ μ3 − 386˜ μ2 + 89˜ μ from the literature [13]. Eq. 1 is further modified to incorporate the friction cone as follows: 

α = ρcgf (˜ μ)



Gn + min 



1, μ∥Gn∥2

∥Gt∥2



Gt



(2) where Gn and Gt are the normal and tangential components of the generic RFT function G, and μ is the coefficient of surface friction. Therefore, the resistive force per area per depth α on each infinitesimal surface element is fully determined by G.We now re-express G in terms of an orthogonal basis and angles measured from these directions to align our formulation with the well-known 2D RFT [11]. To this end, we introduce an orthogonal basis (er , eθ , ez ) and corresponding rotation angles (β, γ, ψ ) where β is the polar angle between the surface normal en and the z-axis, γ is the angle between the velocity direction and the r-axis, and ψ is the surface twist angle between the r-axis and the projection of the surface normal onto the rθ -plane denoted as erθ . By geometric decomposition, the unit vectors (en, ev , eg ) are expressed in the orthogonal basis (er , eθ , ez ) as follows: 

en = sin β cos ψer + sin β sin ψeθ − cos βez

ev = cos γer − sin γez

eg = −ez (3) By taking the dot product of G and each basis vector, we can express the generic RFT function in the orthogonal basis as follows: 

G = Gr er + Gθ eθ + Gz ez

Gr (β, γ, ψ ) = c1 sin β cos ψ + c2 cos γ

Gθ (β, γ, ψ ) = c1 sin β sin ψ

Gz (β, γ, ψ ) = −c1 cos β − c2 sin γ − c3 (4) where the characteristic angles (β, γ, ψ ) are computed from the orientation and velocity direction of the finite element, and the scalar functions (c1, c 2, c 3) that depend on the charac-teristic angles are obtained by a 3rd-order polynomial function fitted to plate intrusion experiment data generated via material point method (MPM) simulation. More details can be found in [13]. We now derive the total contact force and moment applied to a humanoid robot’s foot and integrate them into the robot’s whole-body dynamics. The humanoid robot is a floating-base system that can be described by whole-body dynamics (WBD): 

M(qj )¨ qj + b(qj , ˙qj ) = Bτj +

> Nc

X

> c

Jc(qj )⊤Wc (5) where M(qj ) ∈ R(Nj +6) ×(Nj +6) is the mass matrix, 

b(qj , ˙qj ) ∈ RNj +6 is the nonlinear term associated with Coriolis and gravity, B ∈ R(Nj +6) ×Nj is the selection matrix that maps actuated joint torques to generalized coordinates, 

τj ∈ RNj is the applied joint torque, qj , ˙qj , ¨qj ∈ RNj +6 are the generalized coordinate, velocity, and acceleration, Nc is the number of contact bodies, Jc(qj ) ∈ R6×(Nj +6) is the contact Jacobian of contact body c, and Wc = [ F⊤ 

> c

, M⊤ 

> c

]⊤ ∈ R6 is the contact wrench and composed of the contact force Fc and moment Mc, which we derive in the remainder of this section. While the previous work in [10] treats all finite element points as contact points in WBD, which results in a high-dimensional, aggregated contact Jacobian matrix, we instead sum forces on each foot and apply only the net wrench to WBD to reduce simulation cost. 4MLP Terrain Decoder MLP Terrain Encoder  

> MLP Terrain Decoder TCN Terrain Encoder
> Copy
> ...
> Proprioceptive History Privileged Information
> Observation Replay Buffer
> Granular Terrain Sim. 3D RFT Contact Force
> Sim. State Representation Matching Action Distillation Policy Gradient
> Student Network Teacher Network VAE
> frozen trainable
> Figure 3: System diagram of our proposed terrain-adaptive humanoid loco-motion. It has two-stage training where privileged teacher network is first trained with VAE terrain encoder and MLP policy. Then, this teacher policy is distilled to deployable student policy by teacher-student RL.

For each foot body c, we predefine a collider as a set of N

grid points {pi | i = 1 , . . . , N } on the body surface Sc. A grid point is treated as an active contact point when its z position is below the surface level ( z = 0 ). Using the resistive force 

α derived above, the discretized contact force at each active contact point follows Eq. 1, given by Fc,i = αi|zi|1zi<0dSi,evaluated at contact point i. Finally, we accumulate the contact forces and moments over all active contact points as follows: 

Fc = P 

> i

Fc,i , Mc = P

> i

(pi − pb) × Fc,i where pb is the anchor point of contact body c, which is the ankle joint position in our setup. IV. M ETHOD 

This section details our terrain-adaptive RL framework, which builds on the granular contact model introduced above. 

A. Terrain-Adaptive Reinforcement Learning 

We formulate the velocity-tracking task for humanoid lo-comotion as a Markov Decision Process (MDP). At each timestep t, the agent receives the observation ot, performs an action at according to its current policy π(·| ot), and obtains a scalar reward Rt. The goal of the agent is to maximize the discounted sum of rewards Eπ [P∞ 

> t=0

γtRt], where γ ∈ [0 , 1) 

is the discount factor. Our control architecture leverages a terrain encoder as an adaptation module, trained via teacher-student RL. Fig. 3 illustrates the overall architecture. 

Teacher-Student RL: We leverage teacher-student RL [30] where we first train the teacher policy πteacher (at|ot, zt), which outputs the teacher action at, using an asymmetric actor-critic method [31] along with the terrain encoder. In the asymmetric actor-critic setup, the teacher encoder and critic have access to privileged information that is not accessible on hardware, including ground truth robot states and terrain material properties. The teacher policy itself receives only the proprioceptive observation ot and the latent zt. The latent variable zt is produced by a learned terrain encoder from the privileged observation and proprioceptive history, encoding terrain information as detailed in the next paragraph. We then distill the teacher policy and terrain encoder into a deployable student policy πstudent (ˆ at|ot, ˆzt), which outputs the student action ˆat, and student encoder via behavior cloning of the teacher’s policy actions and latent embeddings. 

Terrain Representation: We concurrently train a terrain encoder and decoder alongside the policy and condition the policy on the encoder’s latent variable to capture terrain infor-mation. The teacher encoder and decoder are trained jointly via a variational autoencoder (VAE) framework [32], while the student encoder is trained by imitating the teacher encoder’s output. The student has no decoder of its own and reuses the teacher’s fixed decoder during training. During teacher policy training, the teacher terrain encoder ϕteacher (zt|st, ot−N :t) re-ceives the privileged observation st and proprioceptive history 

ot−N :t as input, and outputs the latent variable zt .The resulting latent variable is concatenated with the current obser-vation ot and processed by the actor network. Unlike previous methods [6], [28] which train the terrain encoder only via policy gradient loss, we leverage a variational auto encoder (VAE) [32] to learn a structured latent space, since its ex-plicit reconstruction objective shapes the latent representation directly. The decoder ψ(zt) is designed to reconstruct only the normalized media-dependent scaling coefficient η = ψ(zt) = 

ξ/ξ max , where ξmax = ρmax g f (˜ μ)|˜μ=˜ μmax is the maximum scaling coefficient across all terrain materials. Reconstructing only η, rather than the full privileged state, steers the latent representation specifically toward terrain material properties. During student policy training, the student terrain encoder 

ϕstudent (ot−N :t) receives the proprioceptive history ot−N :t and outputs the latent variable ˆzt.

Loss Function: The teacher network is jointly optimized by the Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) [33] loss and the VAE loss, Lteacher = LPPO + LVAE , with 

LVAE = ( η − ˆη)2 + βD KL (p(zt|st, ot−N :t)∥p(zt)) (6) where ˆη = ψ(ˆ zt) , p(zt|st, ot−N :t) is the posterior distribution of zt given the privileged observation st and proprioceptive history ot−N :t, and p(zt) is the prior distribution of zt

assumed to be N (0, I). We train the student network with a combined loss Lstudent = wPPO LPPO + wdist Ldist + Lrep ,consisting of a PPO term LPPO , an action distillation term 

Ldist = ∥at − ˆat∥22, and a representation matching term. 

Lrep = ∥zt − ˆzt∥22 + ( ψ(zt) − ψ(ˆ zt)) 2 (7) The distillation loss Ldist encourages the student to re-produce teacher actions, while the representation loss Lrep 

enforces alignment between teacher and student encoders both in latent space and in decoded scaling coefficient space, encouraging the student encoder to identify terrain stiffness from proprioceptive history. The weights wPPO and wdist follow a curriculum inspired by previous work [8]. 

B. Environment Design 

Observation and Action Space: Proprioceptive informa-tion includes angular velocity ωz , joint positions qj , joint 5

velocities ˙qj , and command velocity. Additionally, we include the projected gravity gb derived from IMU data. Finally, the actions from the previous timestep at−1 are also incorporated into the observation, which has been shown to produce smooth actions [34]. The privileged observation st includes base linear velocity vxy , foot height in the global frame pf , foot contact state cf , contact force Fc, current swing time since lift-off 

Ts, and normalized media-dependent scaling coefficient η.As with the teacher actor, the student actor also receives the proprioceptive observation ot and the latent representation ˆzt

from the student terrain encoder that takes an N -step history of proprioceptive states ot−N :t as input. The action at ∈ R29 

represents the desired whole-body joint position offsets from a nominal pose q0,j , i.e., at = qdes  

> j

− q0,j .

Reward Functions: Our reward design is summarized on our project page. We leverage existing reward functions implemented in IsaacLab for bipedal locomotion tasks, which include velocity command tracking, center of mass height tracking, and others. Reward functions specific to our problem include penalties on the foot orientation, joint power, and contact impact. 

Implementation Detail: We employ PPO [33], an on-policy model-free RL algorithm, to train the teacher policy. Both the actor and critic networks are implemented as separate three-layer MLPs with hidden sizes of ( 512 , 256 , 128 ) and ELU activations. The teacher terrain encoder is a three-layer MLP with hidden sizes of ( 256 , 128 , 64 ) and ELU activations. The decoder is a three-layer MLP with hidden sizes of ( 64 ,

128 , 256 ) and ELU activations. The student terrain encoder is implemented as a temporal convolutional network (TCN) with three one-dimensional convolutional layers followed by a single MLP. It receives an N -step history of proprioceptive states. The policy is parameterized as a Gaussian distribution during training, with the mean and standard deviation pre-dicted by the actor MLP. To simulate deformable soft terrain, we implement the soft contact model with NVIDIA Warp [35], enabling simulation at hundreds of thousands of frames per second on a single RTX 4090 GPU. 

Training: We train the RL policy with 4096 agents in parallel on IsaacLab [17] using a single NVIDIA RTX 4090 

GPU. For the teacher, we use PPO jointly with VAE and train it for 20 , 000 iterations. For the student, we use DAgger [36] with PPO and train it for 20 , 000 iterations. During both training and inference, RL runs at 50 Hz, while low-level PD control and physics simulation run at 200 Hz. To handle real-world uncertainties associated with granular terrain and robot dynamics, we employ domain randomization with parameters listed on our project page. Furthermore, we introduce a training curriculum to facilitate stable policy learn-ing. We linearly ramp up the command velocity and tracking reward weight over the first 15 , 000 iterations to introduce progressively challenging commands. We also gradually lower the hard contact ground in the −z direction as the robot successfully traverses terrain. This terrain curriculum ensures the robot first learns locomotion behaviors on hard terrain before transitioning to soft terrain. V. R ESULTS 

We evaluate the performance of the proposed control system for robust walking and running on different types of granular terrain in both simulation and real-world experiments. 

A. Simulation Evaluation 

We first evaluate the fidelity of our contact model in isolation through a single rigid body intrusion experiment, comparing horizontal travel distance, ground penetration, and ground reaction forces against the material point method (MPM). We then examine how the contact model used during training affects the bipedal locomotion policy, evaluating torso stability and tracking accuracy under straight-line and turning walking, as well as robustness to unmodeled payload. Next, we evaluate our terrain-adaptive policy across basalt, sand, and poppy seed terrain and compare it against policies trained with the rigid and 3D RFT contact models. Finally, we analyze the policy’s ability to perceive and adapt its behavior during transitions among terrains of varying stiffness. 

Simulation Setup: We test on high-fidelity granular terrain simulated with the MPM solver [19] from NVIDIA Newton physics [27]. The evaluation uses two contact solvers: MuJoCo Warp [16] handles the robot’s whole-body and rigid contact dynamics, while the MPM solver computes contact forces on deformable sand. We use success rate (SR), velocity tracking error ev , and yaw tracking error eθ as metrics. The success rate is measured by running 100 episodes and computing the proportion of episodes that complete the entire course of terrain. An episode is considered a failure if the robot violates the base height constraint ( pz < 0.2 m), the orientation constraint ( |θx| > π 

> 4

or |θy | > π 

> 4

rad), or fails to complete the terrain within 10 s. The tracking error is measured as the mean absolute error between the commanded and measured base velocity, computed over 10 s episodes. 

3D RFT best captures three-dimensional granular in-trusion dynamics. Next, we analyze the accuracy of our proposed contact model and its contribution to policy learning. We first compare the horizontal travel distance and sinkage of a 35 kg object, whose mass matches the Unitree G1 robot’s, under different contact models. The object is initialized at a height of 0.1 m above the surface with a forward velocity of 1.0 m/s. The compared models are (1) IsaacLab’s default rigid contact model (Rigid), (2) 2D RFT [11] with a Coulomb friction model (Heuristic-RFT), (3) the jammed granular cone models [9], [10] (Cone-RFT-Single and Cone-RFT-Multi), (4) 3D-RFT [13], and (5) the material point method (MPM) [19]. We randomize the grain density ρc and the internal and surface friction coefficients ˜μ, μ across trials, and compare the resulting distributions of horizontal travel distance and sinkage. Simulation results are shown in Fig. 4. We treat Newton’s MPM simulation as a continuum reference for granular intrusion. We aim to evaluate which reduced-order models best reproduce the MPM’s intrusion result. Fig. 5 shows the statistics of the object’s horizontal travel distance and sinkage (left) and the ground reaction force (GRF) profiles (right) under different contact models. Across the randomized trials, our proposed contact model achieves 63D-RFT Heuristic-RFT Cone-DRFT-Single Cone-DRFT-Multi MPM 

Figure 4: Snapshots of a 35 kg box projected at 1.0 m/s under different contact models. From left to right : 3D-RFT, Heuristic-RFT [11], Cone-RFT-Single [9], Cone-RFT-Multi [10], and MPM [19]. 0.2 0.4 0.6 Horizontal Distance (m) 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 Sinkage (m)  −800 −400 0         

> Fx (N) −8 08
> Fy (N) 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Time (s) 0800 1600
> Fz (N)
> Rigid Heuristic-RFT Cone-RFT-Multi 3D-RFT MPM

Figure 5: Horizontal travel distance and sinkage (left) and ground reaction force (GRF) profiles (right). On the left, each point corresponds to one trial with randomized material density, surface friction, and internal friction coefficients. 

the closest horizontal travel distance and sinkage to the MPM simulation, while Heuristic-RFT and Cone-RFT-Multi produce a substantially larger horizontal travel distance. Cone-RFT-Single produces excessive slippage, as its single-point contact formulation does not hold for a bipedal robot with a large foot contact area. It is therefore omitted from the main results. The GRF in the x and z directions produced by our model also match the MPM simulation more closely than those of Heuristic-RFT. In the lateral direction, Heuristic-RFT produces no force response, as its Coulomb-type tangential component acts only along the slip direction within the sagittal plane. In contrast, the lateral force response of our model emerges naturally from the 3D RFT formulation rather than from a heuristically designed tangential model. 

3D RFT facilitate the best RL policy performance. We also evaluate the contribution of each contact model to the RL policy performance of bipedal locomotion. For this purpose, we train PPO policies with the contact models mentioned above except Cone-RFT-Single as it cannot provide stable simulation results to reliably train a policy. We then evaluate each policy with MPM simulation on poppy seed using success rate and path tracking error, computed via dynamic time warping between the executed and commanded trajectories. We select three evaluation scenarios, circular walking on flat terrain and rough terrain, and straight walking on deep sand with a 30 cm depth and a low internal friction angle of 20 ◦.We generate rough terrain by initializing the z position of the MPM grid with a sinusoidal function. More details on the terrain geometry are available on the supplementary project page. These scenarios are chosen to highlight the performance difference among Heuristic-RFT, Cone-RFT-Multi, and 3D-RFT policies, especially when the terrain involves complex tangential-direction intrusion dynamics. As shown in Table I, 3D-RFT outperforms the baselines in all three scenarios, and the performance gap is more significant when the robot walks on rough terrain or deep sand. This is because 3D-

Table I: Comparison among vanilla policies trained with different contact models. Policies are evaluated on poppy seed terrain simulated by MPM. The highest success rate and lowest errors are highlighted in bold. N/A indicates that the policy fails to achieve any successful episode; thus, tracking errors are not applicable.                                            

> Task Name SR ↑(%) DTW ↓(m)
> Circular walk flat 3D-RFT 100 0.106 ±0.024
> Heuristic-RFT 100 0.142 ±0.026
> Cone-RFT-Multi 100 0.173 ±0.034
> Circular walk rough 3D-RFT 100 0.141 ±0.047
> Heuristic-RFT 100 0.216 ±0.042
> Cone-RFT-Multi 100 0.455 ±0.101
> Walk deep sand 3D-RFT 85 0.133 ±0.077
> Heuristic-RFT 30.492 ±0.229
> Cone-RFT-Multi 80.353 ±0.048

Table II: Results of per-terrain evaluation with MPM simulation. We report success rate (SR), velocity tracking error ( ev ), and yaw tracking error ( eθ ). The highest success rate and lowest tracking errors are highlighted in bold. N/A indicates that the policy fails to achieve any successful episode; thus, tracking errors are not applicable.                                                                          

> Terrain Policy Contact Model SR ↑(%) ev↓(m /s) eθ↓(deg)
> basalt Ours 3D-RFT 100 0.29 ±0.15 0.93 ±0.27
> PPO 3D-RFT 100 0.35 ±0.18 2.71 ±0.89
> PPO Rigid 98 0.35 ±0.17 1.55 ±0.67
> sand Ours 3D-RFT 100 0.33 ±0.14 1.86 ±0.47
> PPO 3D-RFT 100 0.35 ±0.14 2.14 ±0.85
> PPO Rigid 0N/A N/A poppy seed Ours 3D-RFT 100 0.35 ±0.14 2.07 ±0.42
> PPO 3D-RFT 100 0.36 ±0.12 1.77 ±0.73
> PPO Rigid 0N/A N/A

RFT better captures tangential intrusion dynamics, which is crucial for stabilization in lateral direction. While domain randomization helps improve the performance of Heuristic-RFT and Cone-RFT-Multi policies, it is not sufficient to match the performance of 3D-RFT under difficult terrain conditions. 

Our policy with 3D RFT achieves the best performance across diverse granular terrain. We assess the policy per-formance across basalt, sand, and poppy seed simulated by MPM. We vary the internal friction coefficient ˜μ and grain density ρc to respective values for each terrain. Here, we compare three policies: (1) Rigid, (2) PPO policies trained with 3D-RFT contact model, and (3) our proposed terrain-aware teacher-student policy (Ours) trained with 3D-RFT contact model. We sample forward velocity commands from 

1.0 to 2.5 m/s to evaluate walking and running behaviors. Results summarized in Table II demonstrate that the policies trained with 3D-RFT achieve substantially higher success rates and tracking accuracy than Rigid, and Ours achieves the best tracking accuracy overall. As evaluation terrain becomes softer, the success rate of Rigid drops sharply, confirming that accurate granular contact modeling during training is critical for locomotion over granular terrain. 

3D RFT enables dynamic jumping on sand. Beyond bipedal walking, our method is applicable to dynamic jumping motion. To this end, we train a jumping controller based on im-itation RL and assistive wrench from ZEST [37] using the 3D-RFT contact model. The policy is trained to imitate a kinematic joint trajectory retargeted from human motion capture data. As demonstrated in Fig. 6, the policy successfully achieves jumping on simulated granular terrain. Further implementation 7          

> Figure 6: Jumping motion achieved by PPO-Rigid (left) and PPO-3D-RFT (right). PPO-Rigid fails to compensate ground slippage before flight phase, whereas PPO-3D-RFT successfully achieves the jump. 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 Commanded velocity (m/s) 123Average velocity (m/s)
> Dry sand Rigid 3D-RFT Ours 0.5 1.0 1.5 Commanded velocity (m/s) 0.5 1.0 1.5 Average velocity (m/s)
> Basalt Rigid 3D-RFT Ours
> Figure 7: Command velocity tracking of Rigid, 3D-RFT, and Ours on dry sand (left) and basalt (right). Missing data points represent failed trials.

details are available on our project page. 

B. Hardware Experiments 

We deploy the trained RL policy on a Unitree G1 humanoid robot to validate our approach in real world. The policy outputs joint position targets at 50 Hz, which are sent to the robot’s low-level PD controller. We test the policy on three types of granular terrain, namely basalt, a beach volleyball court, and a beach, as illustrated in Fig. 1. As in simulation, we use success rate, velocity tracking error, and yaw tracking error as metrics. We consider an episode a failure if the robot fails to maintain upright posture and requires human intervention. 

3D RFT enables successful running behavior and our teacher-student policy improves velocity tracking per-formance. We investigate the performance of the proposed controller on basalt and dry sand to analyze its robustness across different materials. Specifically, we compare (1) Rigid, (2) 3D-RFT, and (3) Ours, with commanded velocities of 0.5,

1.0, 1.5, 2.0, and 2.5 m/s as shown in Fig. 7. On dry sand, all controllers show comparable velocity tracking up to 1.0 m/s. At low speeds, the foot experiences small granular resistive forces, so Rigid can still maintain balance and achieve accurate velocity tracking. However, at higher speeds ( ≥ 1.5 m/s), Rigid experiences substantial degradation in performance due to increased perturbations to the foot, and fails to walk above 

1.5 m/s. Furthermore, while 3D-RFT and Ours maintain stable locomotion at the highest commanded velocity, Ours achieves the best velocity tracking. On basalt, which is rougher and less uniform than the volleyball court sand, Rigid fails to maintain balance at all commanded velocities. The combination of granular slippage and uneven terrain exceeds what the rigid-contact-trained policy can handle. In contrast, 3D-RFT and Ours successfully achieve locomotion across the entire range, with Ours achieving better velocity tracking than 3D-RFT at all commanded velocities. This highlights the advantage of our approach under varying terrain conditions. 

Our policy achieves compliant ankle control. Next, we analyze the resulting behavior of our teacher-student policy on hardware while walking on dry sand. To this end, we pay attention to the ankle pitch torque estimated from the measured 4 6025 50 Torque (Nm)  L-Ankle-pitch 4 6025 50 R-Ankle-pitch Rigid 3D-RFT Ours   

> Figure 8: Estimated left and right ankle pitch torques during forward walking (v= 1 .5m/s), comparing Rigid, 3D-RFT, and Ours.

motor currents, since it directly reflects how each controller absorbs terrain disturbance during stance. Fig. 8 shows the estimated left and right ankle pitch torques during forward walking ( v = 1 .5 m/s). Our policy shows a lower peak ankle pitch torque than Rigid and 3D-RFT on both legs, indicating compliant ankle control that minimizes terrain disturbance. We conjecture that this is induced by the terrain encoder that estiamtes terrain stiffness, and baseline PPO without terrain estimation learns energy consuming gait that works for any terrain condition. This finding aligns with the observation in the supplementary video that our controller exhibits the least stamping motion and kicks up the least sand among the three controllers. 

C. Locomotion under Terrain Transition 

To evaluate terrain stiffness estimation and adaptation, we test our teacher-student policy in simulation on three consec-utive sand layers of increasing softness (basalt, dry sand, and poppy seed) simulated with the MPM solver. On hardware, we achieve this terrain variation by building a pile of loosely packed sand. In simulation, swing foot clearance stays near its nominal value of 9 cm on stiff terrain and rises up to 16 cm on softer terrain to avoid dragging the foot into the ground, as shown in Fig. 9. This adaptation tracks the decoded terrain stiffness η, which drops sharply as the robot enters softer sand layers, showing that the policy perceives terrain conditions and adjusts its behavior accordingly. We observe the same trend on hardware while walking at 

v = 0 .5 m/s, as shown in Fig. 10. Ours maintains positive foot clearance throughout the transition, while the PPO policy’s foot clearance repeatedly drops below the ground reference, indicating that the foot drags into the sand rather than clear-ing it. This is corroborated by the recorded joint torques, where PPO exhibits large, reactive torque spikes indicative of repeated balance recovery, consistent with the foot-dragging observed in the hardware video, whereas Ours maintains a comparatively bounded torque profile. The predicted ground stiffness also tracks the terrain condition, indicating that our terrain-aware policy correctly identifies the terrain. VI. C ONCLUSION 

We present an RL framework for humanoid locomotion on granular terrain that combines a 3D RFT-based granular contact model with a terrain-adaptive teacher-student policy. Simulation and hardware experiments demonstrate that explicit granular contact modeling during training is critical for robust 8a b c               

> 123456Time (s) 0.0 0.3 0.6 0.9 Stiffness
> abc123456Time (s) 0.00 0.04 0.08 0.12 0.16 Left foot clearance (m) abc3D-RFT Ours

Figure 9: Online terrain estimation and adapted left foot clearance in MPM simulation. When the robot moves from stiff to softer granular layers, the predicted terrain stiffness drops, and foot clearance increases to clear the foot from the ground. Ours PPO 

Foot dragging High foot clearance 

Figure 10: Online terrain stiffness estimation, swing foot clearance (left foot), and total joint torque (leg+waist) from hardware experiment. Our method maintains consistent walking behavior while baseline PPO loses balance during terrain transition. The shaded region marks the interval during which the foot is on the soft sand patch. 

locomotion, and that the learned terrain estimator enables adaptive behaviors such as swing foot clearance modulation on soft terrain. Future work will (1) extend the proposed method to rough terrain such as slopes and wavy terrain and (2) study energy-efficient walking gaits on sand. VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Cheng-Yuan Li, Sachin Kelkar, and Jaehwi Jang for their help in the experiments. We also thank Shashank Agarwal and Deniz Kerimoglu for valuable discussion about RFT and MPM. REFERENCES 

[1] X. Xiong, A. D. Ames, and D. I. Goldman, “A stability region criterion for flat-footed bipedal walking on deformable granular terrain,” in 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2017, pp. 4552–4559. [2] J. R. Gosyne, C. M. Hubicki, X. Xiong, A. D. Ames, and D. I. Goldman, “Bipedial locomotion up sandy slopes: Systematic experiments using zero moment point methods,” in 2018 IEEE-RAS 18th International Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids) . IEEE, 2018, pp. 994–1001. [3] C. M. Hubicki, J. J. Aguilar, D. I. Goldman, and A. D. Ames, “Tractable terrain-aware motion planning on granular media: An impulsive jumping study,” in 2016 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) .IEEE, 2016, pp. 3887–3892. [4] A. H. Chang, C. M. Hubicki, J. J. Aguilar, D. I. Goldman, A. D. Ames, and P. A. Vela, “Learning terrain dynamics: A gaussian process modeling and optimal control adaptation framework applied to robotic jumping,” IEEE Transactions on Control Systems Technology , vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 1581–1596, 2020. [5] T. Miki, J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter, “Learning robust perceptive locomotion for quadrupedal robots in the wild,” Science robotics ,vol. 7, no. 62, p. eabk2822, 2022. [6] J. Lee, J. Hwangbo, L. Wellhausen, V. Koltun, and M. Hutter, “Learning quadrupedal locomotion over challenging terrain,” Science robotics , vol. 5, no. 47, p. eabc5986, 2020. [7] F. Wu, X. Nal, J. Jang, W. Zhu, Z. Gu, A. Wu, and Y. Zhao, “Learn to teach: Sample-efficient privileged learning for humanoid locomotion over real-world uneven terrain,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , 2025. [8] I. Radosavovic, T. Xiao, B. Zhang, T. Darrell, J. Malik, and K. Sreenath, “Real-world humanoid locomotion with reinforcement learning,” Science Robotics , vol. 9, no. 89, p. eadi9579, 2024. [9] S. Choi, G. Ji, J. Park, H. Kim, J. Mun, J. H. Lee, and J. Hwangbo, “Learning quadrupedal locomotion on deformable terrain,” Science Robotics , vol. 8, no. 74, p. eade2256, 2023. [10] Z. Luo, J. Zhang, Z. Xu, W. Li, X. Li, X. Chen, Z. Yu, A. Tang, and P. Lu, “Mild: Tractable terrain modeling for learning improved bipedal locomotion on deformable surfaces,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 1922–1929, 2025. [11] C. Li, T. Zhang, and D. I. Goldman, “A terradynamics of legged locomotion on granular media,” science , vol. 339, no. 6126, pp. 1408–1412, 2013. [12] S. Agarwal, A. Karsai, D. I. Goldman, and K. Kamrin, “Surprising simplicity in the modeling of dynamic granular intrusion,” Science advances , vol. 7, no. 17, p. eabe0631, 2021. [13] S. Agarwal, D. I. Goldman, and K. Kamrin, “Mechanistic framework for reduced-order models in soft materials: Application to three-dimensional granular intru-sion,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , vol. 120, no. 4, p. e2214017120, 2023. [14] X. Chen, X. Huang, J. Yi, J. W. Shan, and T. Liu, “A dynamic foot–terrain interaction model for biped walking on granular media,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , pp. 1–9, 2025. [15] X. Chen, X. Huang, P. Shan, J. Yi, and T. Liu, “Bipedal-walking-dynamics model on granular terrains,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.11981 , 2026. [16] G. DeepMind and NVIDIA, “Mujoco warp: Gpu-optimized version of the mujoco physics simulator,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/ google-deepmind/mujoco warp [17] M. Mittal, P. Roth, J. Tigue, A. Richard, O. Zhang, P. Du, A. Serrano-Munoz, X. Yao, R. Zurbr¨ ugg, N. Rudin et al. , “Isaac lab: A gpu-accelerated simulation framework for multi-modal robot learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.04831 ,2025. [18] R. Zhang, B. Tagliafierro, C. Vanden Heuvel, S. Sabarwal, L. Bakke, Y. Yue, X. Wei, R. Serban, and D. Negrut ¸, “Chrono dem-engine: A discrete element method dual-gpu simulator with customizable contact forces and element shape,” Computer Physics Communications , vol. 300, p. 109196, 2024. [19] G. Daviet and F. Bertails-Descoubes, “A semi-implicit material point method for the continuum simulation of granular materials,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 1–13, 2016. [20] Y.-H. Lee, K. Kim, J. Park, C. H. Park, and H.-W. Park, “Soft contact model for robust locomotion of legged robots.” [21] D. J. Lynch, K. M. Lynch, and P. B. Umbanhowar, “The soft-landing problem: Minimizing energy loss by a legged robot impacting yielding terrain,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 3658–3665, 2020. [22] D. J. Lynch, J. L. Pusey, S. W. Gart, P. B. Umbanhowar, and K. M. Lynch, “Effi-cient, responsive, and robust hopping on deformable terrain,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 41, pp. 782–800, 2024. [23] L. Ding, H. Gao, Z. Deng, J. Song, Y. Liu, G. Liu, and K. Iagnemma, “Foot–terrain interaction mechanics for legged robots: Modeling and experimental validation,” 

The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 32, no. 13, pp. 1585–1606, 2013. [24] V. Vasilopoulos, I. S. Paraskevas, and E. G. Papadopoulos, “Compliant terrain legged locomotion using a viscoplastic approach,” in 2014 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems . IEEE, 2014, pp. 4849–4854. [25] L. K. Treers, C. Cao, and H. S. Stuart, “Granular resistive force theory implemen-tation for three-dimensional trajectories,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters ,vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 1887–1894, 2021. [26] S. Godon, C. Prados, A. Chemori, A. Ristolainen, and M. Kruusmaa, “Walking in mud: Modeling, control, and experiments of quadruped locomotion,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics , vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 6107–6118, 2025. [27] The Newton Contributors, “Newton: GPU-accelerated physics simulation for robotics and simulation research,” Apr. 2025. [Online]. Available: https: //github.com/newton-physics/newton [28] A. Kumar, Z. Fu, D. Pathak, and J. Malik, “Rma: Rapid motor adaptation for legged robots,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.04034 , 2021. [29] G. Ji, J. Mun, H. Kim, and J. Hwangbo, “Concurrent training of a control policy and a state estimator for dynamic and robust legged locomotion,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 4630–4637, 2022. [30] D. Chen, B. Zhou, V. Koltun, and P. Kr¨ ahenb¨ uhl, “Learning by cheating,” in 

Conference on robot learning . PMLR, 2020, pp. 66–75. [31] L. Pinto, M. Andrychowicz, P. Welinder, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel, “Asymmetric actor critic for image-based robot learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.06542 ,2017. 9[32] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-encoding variational bayes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114 , 2013. [33] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov, “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347 , 2017. [34] N. Rudin, D. Hoeller, P. Reist, and M. Hutter, “Learning to walk in minutes using massively parallel deep reinforcement learning,” in Conference on Robot Learning .PMLR, 2022, pp. 91–100. [35] M. Macklin, “Warp: A High-performance Python Framework for GPU Simulation and Graphics,” Mar. 2022, nVIDIA GPU Technology Conference (GTC). [Online]. Available: https://github.com/NVIDIA/warp [36] S. Ross, G. Gordon, and D. Bagnell, “A reduction of imitation learning and structured prediction to no-regret online learning,” in Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference on artificial intelligence and statistics . JMLR Workshop and Conference Proceedings, 2011, pp. 627–635. [37] J. P. Sleiman, H. Li, A. Adu-Bredu, R. Deits, A. Kumar, K. Bergamin, M. Bhard-waj, S. Biddlestone, N. Burger, M. A. Estrada et al. , “Zest: Zero-shot embodied skill transfer for athletic robot control,” Science Robotics , vol. 11, no. 117, p. eaec7695, 2026.