Title: Running hardware-aware neural architecture search on embedded devices under 512MB of RAM

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.14824v1

Published Time: Tue, 16 Jun 2026 00:09:08 GMT

Number of Pages: 2

Markdown Content:
# Running hardware-aware neural architecture search on embedded devices under 512MB of RAM 

Andrea Mattia Garavagno ∗† , Edoardo Ragusa ∗, Paolo Gastaldo ∗, and Antonio Frisoli †∗ Department of Electrical, Electronic, Telecommunication Engineering and Naval Architecture, DITEN University of Genoa, Genoa 16145, Italy 

† Department of Excellence in Robotics & AI, Institute of Mechanical Intelligence, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, Pisa 56127, Italy e-mail: AndreaMattia.Garavagno@ {edu.unige.it, santannapisa.it }

> This work has been accepted for publication in the proceedings of the 2024 IEEE International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE). © 2024 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. Final publication is available at https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCE59016.2024.10444268.

Abstract —This document proposes a novel approach to hardware-aware neural architecture search (HW NAS) that considers the resources available on the computing platform running it, enabling its execution on various embedded devices. The presented HW NAS produces tiny convolutional neural net-works (CNNs) targeting low-end microcontroller units (MCUs), typically involved in the Internet of Things (IoT) or wearable robotics, opening new use cases. A gateway could run it to tailor CNNs’ architecture on the acquired data without using external servers, ensuring privacy. The proposed technique achieves state-of-the-art results in the human-recognition tasks on the Visual Wake Word dataset, a standard TinyML benchmark, on several embedded devices. 

Index Terms —TinyML, Hardware Aware Neural Architecture Search, Internet of Things, Wearable Robotics 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Hardware-aware neural architecture search (HW NAS) auto-mates the design of neural architectures considering hardware constraints imposed by the target device that support the prediction phase of the generated model. The first HW NASs exploited reinforcement learning (RL) to search for the best architecture: a controller produced instances of architectures and was rewarded based on the accuracy obtained after the training and the hardware cost [1], [2]. The search cost was high both in terms of FLOPS and memory requirements. MNASNet [1] required 40,000 GPU hours of execution to obtain the presented results. Over-parametrized networks, known as supernetwork, con-taining all the models belonging to the search space as sub-networks reduced significantly search time [3]. Such a solution allowed training only one big network and then searching inside it for the best sub-network. Techniques like evolutionary algorithms [4], [5] and gradient descent methods [3], [6] were commonly used to search for the best sub-network. Even though the search time had been reduced, a super network still required high-end GPUs to be trained. MCUNet [4] required 300 GPU hours of execution to obtain the presented results. Bi-level optimization methods allowed to further reduce search costs down to 20 GPU hours [7] and eventually remove the need for a GPU [8], obtaining the resulting architecture in 3.5 hours of execution on a laptop. The present research introduces a novel approach to HW NAS. Besides the constraints given by the target hardware, it also considers the resources available on the computing plat-form running it, enabling its execution on embedded devices. II. P ROPOSAL 

The present work proposes a novel approach to HW NAS which considers the resources available on the computing platform running it, besides the constraints given by the target hardware. To implement, an existing HW NAS [8] producing tiny convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for low-end microcontroller units (MCUs) has been modified. Three main design choices characterize HW NAS procedures: the search space, the formulation of the optimization problem, and the search strategy. The search space sets the admissible network architectures. The optimization problem establishes the search boundaries and the evaluation metric used. Finally, the search strategy describes how the search space is explored, i.e., how the solution is found. The search space contains candidate solutions based on stacks of cells with a fixed structure. Each cell has three layers: a max pooling layer followed by a batch normalization layer which feeds a convolutional layer. The max pooling layer always halves the input resolution. Convolutional layers use a fixed kernel size of (3,3) with stride 1. Cells are stacked upon a first convolutional layer having kernels, preceded by a fixed pre-processing pipeline per-forming min-max standardization and batch normalization on the input data. A global average pooling layer with dropout regularization feeds a final layer with softmax activation for classification. The number of kernels used in each cell was set using the heuristic proposed in [8] that sets the number of kernels as a function of the selected value k for the first convolutional layer and as a function of the number of cells. Eventually, a candidate architecture has two parameters: k

and c. c defines the number of cells stacked. This tiny search space includes a few thousand possible architectures, which can even lessen in cases of really tight resource constraints. Equation 1 shows the new optimization problem proposed in the present paper, where function f returns the maximum vali-dation accuracy after three epochs of training. The constraints 

ϕR, ϕF , ϕM , represent respectively peak RAM occupancy, Flash occupancy, and number of MACC. ϕE represents the available RAM of the embedded device running the HW NAS. Thanks to the novel constraint, during the search space exploration, candidate solutions that do not fit the embedded 

> arXiv:2606.14824v1 [cs.AR] 12 Jun 2026

device running the HW NAS but that would fit the target hardware are discarded to allow the execution of the algorithm on the embedded platform. 

P :



max f (x)

ϕE (x) ≤ ξE

ϕR(x) ≤ ξRϕF (x) ≤ ξF , ϕ M (x) ≤ ξM

ξR, ξ F , ξ M , ξ E > 0

(1) The optimization problem P is solved with a derivative-free optimization technique proposed in [8]. III. E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS 

The implemented HW NAS has been run on four different embedded platforms: the NVIDIA® Jetson Nano™ with 4 GB of RAM, operated in the MAXN power mode (J. Nano), the Raspberry Pi 4 Model B with 4 GB of RAM (RPi 4), the Raspberry Pi 3 Model B (RPi 3), and the Raspberry Pi Zero 2 W (RPiZ 2 W). All the boards mounted a passive heatsink. ZRAM kernel module was used with the lzo-rle compression algorithm and a swap area equivalent to 2/3 of the available memory for all the platforms. When possible, the dataset was cached in RAM. The Visual Wake Words dataset, a standard tinyML bench-mark [9], has been adopted. To have a comparison with the state-of-the-art, the largest among the smallest deployment targets, in terms of RAM occupancy, of two famous HW NAS MCUNET and Micronets has been chosen: the STM32F412 MCU. The latter is to balance the fact that they focused on STMicroelectronics’ high-performance MCUs, while the proposed work focused on low-end MCUs. Input size was set at (50,50,3). Table I shows the test accuracy, RAM and Flash occupancy, multiply and accumulate (MAC) instructions, and search costs for each model obtained running the proposed HW NAS on the corresponding embedded platform using the STM32F412 as a deployment target and the Visual Wake Words dataset as a benchmark. All the models are saved in the TFLite format. 

Embedded Acc RAM Flash MACC Time Platform [%] [kiB] [kiB] [MM] [dd] J. Nano 78 36 38.96 2.6 3.9 RPi 4 77.6 33.50 32.84 2.07 1.3 RPi 3 76.6 28.5 23.65 1.3 3.8 RPiZ 2 W 75.1 25 13.95 0.91 4.6 TABLE I TEST ACCURACY , RAM AND FLASH OCCUPANCY , THE NUMBER OF MAC 

> INSTRUCTIONS

, SEARCH COSTS FOR EACH MODEL OBTAINED RUNNING THE PROPOSED HW NAS ON THE CORRESPONDING EMBEDDED PLATFORM USING THE STM32F412 AS A DEPLOYMENT TARGET AND THE 

VISUAL WAKE WORDS DATASET AS A BENCHMARK .

Table II shows for reference purposes the test accuracy, RAM and Flash occupancy, the number of MAC instructions, and hardware target declared by Micronets [6] and MCUNET [4] for the Visual Wake Words dataset. Also these models are saved in the TFLite format. The obtained models are remarkably smaller than the ones from MCUNet and Micronets while having an accuracy com-parable to Micronets. The resulting search costs are in the 

Project Acc RAM Flash MACC input target [%] [kiB] [kiB] [MM] [w,h,c] [STM32] MCUNet 87.4 168.5 530.52 6 64,64,3 F412 Micronets 76.8 70.5 273.81 3.3 50,50,1 F446RE TABLE II TEST ACCURACY , RAM AND FLASH OCCUPANCY , THE NUMBER OF MAC 

> INSTRUCTIONS

, AND RESOLUTION DECLARED BY MICRONETS AND 

MCUNET FOR EACH TARGET FOR THE VISUAL WAKE WORDS DATASET .

order of days because of the nature of the devices involved in the experiment, which are not meant to run HW NAS. A proxy dataset of 10k images could be used to make the search cost more practical. The execution times do not decrease linearly w.r.t. the increase in computational capabilities because, in this case, it is associated with an increase in memory, which allows more candidate solutions to be explored. Noteworthy is the RPi 4 execution time, which is significantly lower than the one of J. Nano because of the absence of the GPU, which left more free memory, allowing the cache of the whole dataset in memory. IV. C ONCLUSION 

The present research introduced a novel approach to HW NAS, which also considers the resources available on the com-puting platform running it, enabling its execution on embedded devices. Its implementation produced an HW NAS meant to design tiny CNNs targeting low-end MCUs, obtaining state-of-the-art results on several embedded devices. Being able to automatically design tiny CNNs for low-end MCUs, typically involved in the IoT or wearable robotics, on embedded devices opens new use cases. For example, a gateway node could run the proposed HW NAS to tailor CNNs’ architecture on the acquired data without using external servers, ensuring privacy. REFERENCES [1] M. Tan, B. Chen, R. Pang, V. Vasudevan, M. Sandler, A. Howard, and Q. V. Le, “Mnasnet: Platform-aware neural architecture search for mobile,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2019, pp. 2820–2828. [2] Y. Yang, C. Wang, L. Gong, and X. Zhou, “Fpnet: customized con-volutional neural network for fpga platforms,” in 2019 International Conference on Field-Programmable Technology (ICFPT). IEEE, 2019, pp. 399–402. [3] H. Liu, K. Simonyan, and Y. Yang, “Darts: Differentiable architecture search,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.09055, 2018. [4] J. Lin, W.-M. Chen, Y. Lin, C. Gan, S. Han et al., “Mcunet: Tiny deep learning on iot devices,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 33, pp. 11 711–11 722, 2020. [5] H. Cai, C. Gan, T. Wang, Z. Zhang, and S. Han, “Once-for-all: Train one network and specialize it for efficient deployment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09791, 2019. [6] C. Banbury, C. Zhou, I. Fedorov, R. Matas, U. Thakker, D. Gope, V. Janapa Reddi, M. Mattina, and P. Whatmough, “Micronets: Neural network architectures for deploying tinyml applications on commodity microcontrollers,” Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems, vol. 3, pp. 517–532, 2021. [7] J. Cui, P. Chen, R. Li, S. Liu, X. Shen, and J. Jia, “Fast and practical neural architecture search,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, 2019, pp. 6509–6518. [8] A. M. Garavagno, E. Ragusa, A. Frisoli, and P. Gastaldo, “A hardware-aware neural architecture search algorithm targeting low-end microcon-trollers,” in 2023 18th Conference on Ph.D Research in Microelectronics and Electronics (PRIME), 2023, pp. 281–284. [9] C. R. Banbury, V. J. Reddi, M. Lam, W. Fu, A. Fazel, J. Holleman, X. Huang, R. Hurtado, D. Kanter, A. Lokhmotov et al., “Bench-marking tinyml systems: Challenges and direction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04821, 2020.