Title: Structured Stochastic Representations of Integrated Dynamic Strategies

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.10998v1

Published Time: Fri, 11 Sep 2026 00:27:46 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Structured Stochastic Representations of Integrated Dynamic Strategies 

# Fredy Vides 

Department of Applied Mathematics, School of Mathematics and Computer Science, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Honduras (UNAH) 

# 9 September 2026 

Abstract 

Dynamic allocation decisions couple present resource use to evolving internal conditions, delayed returns, and future costs. We represent this interaction by four probability localizations linked through regime-indexed, graph-constrained column-stochastic operators. Pre-action state or context selects a locally affine model, while action-dependent changes update subsequent regimes, yielding a causal switched representation of nonlinear evolution. We characterize operator identifiability relative to the graph, the stochastic constraints, and the sampled embedding, separating coefficient recovery from predictive equivalence on the decision domain. Decision making is then formulated through implementable return–cost acceptability regions. Finite-horizon error propagation supplies conservative classification margins, and simultaneous intervals distinguish model-relative near-optimality from certified ε-optimality over a declared finite policy class. Regime-indexed stochastic feedback is admitted when it satisfies the same certification test. Reproducible synthetic laboratories for personal preparation, supplier participation, and customer retention illustrate exact, operator-supplied, and noisy feedback cases. Multinomial experiments show improving recovery of the feedback function and fewer unresolved decisions with increasing sample size, while unrestricted off-policy recovery remains limited. The contribution is a structure-preserving representation–identification–decision workflow, not a domain-specific physiological or commercial calibration. 

# I Introduction 

Allocation is intrinsically dynamic. A present choice changes not only an immediate output but also the internal configura-tion from which later choices, returns, and costs arise. The consequences depend on history, operating conditions, resource availability, and the order of actions. This structure appears in preparation and recovery, inventory replenishment, customer retention, and other human–cyber–physical or organizational processes. A useful representation should therefore preserve admissible transitions and uncertainty while remaining explicit enough to support an implementable decision. Probability vectors provide one such interface between ob-served collective frequencies and dynamical models. Recent stochastic reservoir computers likewise use probabilities of reservoir outcomes as trainable readouts and describe their evo-lution through controlled Markov dynamics; universality results establish the approximation capacity of particular stochastic echo-state-network classes [1]. The present objective is dif-ferent. We do not seek universality or a physical reservoir architecture. We seek graph-structured stochastic operators whose predictions can be connected to return–cost decisions and whose nonidentifiable directions are reported rather than hidden. The construction extends the probability-localization viewpoint of Vides [2] toward allocation and feedback, using the structured stochastic identification architecture of Banegas and Vides [3]. Nonlinear and nonstationary behavior is represented by regime-indexed local models. Switched and hybrid-system formulations provide established tools for describing mode-dependent dynamics [4–6]. Here the regime is selected causally from pre-action information, or updated for the following pe-riod when the current action affects it. Each active probability map remains affine, but state- or context-dependent selection produces nonlinear global evolution. This moderate use of switching avoids presenting one fitted matrix as a universal description of all operating conditions. Identification and decision are deliberately separated. Classi-cal system identification emphasizes excitation, model structure, and the special difficulties created by closed-loop data [7, 8]. Those difficulties are central here because a behavioral allo-cation law can correlate actions with states and leave feasible operator directions observationally equivalent. Exact coeffi-cient recovery is therefore stronger than predictive adequacy on a declared policy domain. On the decision side, stochas-tic model predictive control and chance-constrained methods optimize expected performance while managing probabilistic violations [9]. Our aim is narrower and complementary: classify policies against explicit achievement and cost thresholds, retain unresolved cases when error intervals cross a boundary, and optimize only within the certified region. This implements a dynamic form of satisficing [10] rather than silently converting every tradeoff into one weighted objective. Human-facing examples add a further distinction between measurement error and substantive heterogeneity. Variability across individuals or conditions need not be mere noise; in neuroscience, it has been interpreted as an adaptive property of complex organization, while current measurement approaches must still separate biological variation from methodological uncertainty [11]. The connection used here is methodologi-cal, not physiological: pooled probability localizations require an explicit transportability assumption, and different internal 1arXiv:2609.10998v1 [eess.SY] 10 Sep 2026 configurations or policies may be functionally equivalent for a declared outcome without being structurally identical. The paper makes four contributions. First, it formulates an in-tegrated dynamic strategy through coupled allocation, internal-state, return, and cost localizations with a causal regime conven-tion. Second, it gives graph- and design-relative identifiability conditions and distinguishes the SSRC reduction of repeated tensor words from additional relations induced by the simplex and by the observed design. Third, it develops acceptability certificates from finite-horizon error propagation and separates nominal acceptability, certified acceptability, model-relative near-optimality, and finite-class certified ε-optimality. Fourth, it introduces a regime-indexed stochastic feedback subclass and evaluates exact, operator-supplied, and multinomially noisy instances in reproducible synthetic laboratories. The intended scope is finite-state processes and finite local-izations of compact state spaces. The results do not constitute a general solution to stochastic control, guarantee identifica-tion beyond the excited domain, or calibrate physiological or commercial behavior. Potentially cyclic operation motivates retaining time, regime, and cost information beyond terminal occupancy; results for circulation in homogeneous Markov chains [12] motivate such observables but are not transferred directly to adaptive switched policies. Section II develops the representation, identification, certification, and feedback con-structions. Section III states the combined computational work-flow, Sec. IV clarifies switching and enrichment, Sec. V reports the numerical laboratories, and Sec. VI discusses implications and limitations. 

# II Coupled stochastic descriptions 

Write ∆d−1 = {z ∈ Rd : z ≥ 0, 1⊤z = 1}. At decision time t,

ut ∈ ∆m−1, pt ∈ ∆n−1, qt ∈ ∆nq−1, vt ∈ ∆s−1. (1) These describe input composition, internal-state localization, return categories, and cost categories, respectively. A composi-tion does not determine the total available resource: a budget 

bt must be supplied separately whenever absolute scale affects evolution. Distinct resources can require a product of allocation simplexes rather than one shared simplex. Return and cost categories are measurable, disjoint, and ex-haustive within their respective observation spaces. If Yt and 

ct denote return and cost observations, then qt [a] = Pr (Yt ∈ Ra)

and vt [b] = Pr (ct ∈ Cb). Joint categories can encode, for exam-ple, both depletion and compensating resource consumption without assigning a common monetary value. 

Definition 1. An integrated dynamic strategy is a sequence of admissible allocation rules based on available information, designed to direct the joint evolution of internal localization, returns, and costs under resource and operational constraints. 

Let I − 

> t

denote the information available immediately before the action at time t. Define the controller-accessible localization ¯pt by ¯ pt = pt when the internal localization is observed and by ¯pt = Φt (I − 

> t

) when it must be produced by a declared filter or estimator Φt . The within-period causal order is 

I − 

> t

−→ ( ¯pt , ζt ) −→ νt −→ ut −→ (qt , vt , pt+1). (2) Thus the current regime is either supplied exogenously or se-lected before the action by νt = g( ¯pt , ζt ), and an allocation rule then chooses ut = πt (I − 

> t

, νt ) ∈ Ut (bt ). The primary prototype is the switched additive stochastic model 

pt+1 = αpWp,νt pt + ( 1 − αp)Vp,νt ut , (3) 

qt = αqWq,νt pt + ( 1 − αq)Vq,νt ut , (4) 

vt = αvWv,νt pt + ( 1 − αv)Vv,νt ut . (5) Here νt denotes the operating regime, not enrichment depth; enrichment is indexed separately by a superscript (ℓ) when needed. All W,V blocks are column-stochastic, with dimen-sions n × n, n × m for internal dynamics and nq × n, nq × m or 

s × n, s × m for outputs. Mixing coefficients lie in [0, 1]. The output timing in Eq. (5) is contemporaneous with (pt , ut ); other timing conventions must be specified when comparing laborato-ries. A prescribed regime sequence gives a time-varying affine system. In the fully observed case ¯ pt = pt , a piecewise-constant pre-action rule νt = g(pt , ζt ) partitions the state–context do-main; substitution in Eq. (5) then yields a piecewise-affine state-dependent map and therefore a nonlinear global evolu-tion [4, 5], although every active local model remains linear in its stochastic embedding. If the action is intended to affect regime selection, causality is preserved by assigning the result to the next period, for example νt+1 = g( ¯pt , ut , ζt ), rather than using ut to define νt while simultaneously using νt to define 

ut . Under partial observation, the global dynamics also include the declared filtering recursion and need not be piecewise affine in the latent state alone. This is the intended moderate use of switching: the regime family can distinguish nonlinear operat-ing regions without attributing nonlinearity to a fixed, externally prescribed schedule. The prototypes use prescribed, observed regimes common to the represented population. Hidden, uncer-tain, or heterogeneous regimes require joint regime inference, posterior averaging, or robust constraints; a policy may not condition on an unavailable realized regime. Bayesian priors may constrain blocks or mixing coefficients, while the reported experiments fix the coefficients and identify the blocks from collective output counts. For fixed regime and input, the internal transition is equiva-lently 

Pν (u) = αpWp,ν + ( 1 − αp)( Vp,ν u)1⊤. (6) This is a specific restricted controlled kernel: the input contribu-tion is independent of the source state. More general state–input interactions can be introduced through joint state–input kernels or enriched models. When the internal localization is not ob-served, propagation may still use the latent model state pt , but implementable policies must use the accessible localization ¯ pt

and a declared filtering recursion; replacing ¯ pt by the unavail-able pt would be an oracle policy. 2A Regime-wise SSRC identification 

Let yp,t = pt+1, yq,t = qt , and yv,t = vt . With observed historical allocations ut , use an output-specific stochastic embedding 

z j,t =

 α j pt

(1 − α j)ut



, y j,t = Mj,νt z j,t , (7) where Mj,ν = [ Wj,ν Vj,ν ]. This gives a degree-one block realiza-tion of the SSRC identification architecture in Ref. 3, adapted to the probability-localization setting of Ref. 2. If a common arbitrary β ∈ (0, 1) is used instead, its fitted blocks must be scaled by α j/β and (1 − α j)/(1 − β ); the resulting operator generally has prescribed block column sums rather than unit column sums. Taking β j = α j avoids this distinction in the first prototype. The prototype adapts the supplied pairwise SSRC routine: construct the design only on graph-admissible entries, solve the augmented nonnegative normal-equation system with column-sum equations, and normalize positive columns. The implemen-tation uses a NumPy active-set NNLS solver [13] and records conditioning and pre-normalization errors. It does not identify this procedure with exact equality-constrained least squares, nor claim unconditional numerical stability. The relevant rank test must respect both the graph and the stochastic constraints. For an output dimension r, let 

MG = {M ∈ Sr,d (R) : Mi j = 0 when (i, j) /∈ G} (8) and let par (MG) be its parallel space of graph-supported matri-ces D satisfying 1⊤D = 0. If Z = [ z1, . . . , zN ] and the columns of 

BG form a basis for vec (par (MG)) , define the restricted design 

DG(Z) = ( Z⊤ ⊗ Ir)BG. (9) 

Proposition 1 (Graph- and design-relative identifiability) . The observation map M 7 → MZ is injective on MG if 

ker (Z⊤ ⊗ Ir) ∩ vec (par (MG)) = {0}, (10) 

equivalently if rank DG(Z) = dim par (MG). Conversely, if Eq. (10) fails, every M in the relative interior of MG is observationally equivalent on Z to another member of MG.Proof. For M, M′ ∈ MG, equality MZ = M′Z is equivalent to 

(Z⊤ ⊗ Ir) vec (M − M′) = 0, while M − M′ ∈ par (MG). Hence Eq. (10) implies M = M′. Conversely, a nonzero direction in the intersection can be added with sufficiently small positive or negative coefficient to any relative-interior point without violating its support, nonnegativity, or column sums. Accordingly, the reported constrained rank, nullity, and con-dition number are computed from DG(Z), not from the uncon-strained graph-entry design alone. Rank deficiency then has a precise meaning: the observations do not distinguish every lo-cally feasible stochastic coefficient direction. Boundary points may still be unique through active nonnegativity constraints, so the restricted rank test is sufficient throughout the feasible class and necessary at its relative-interior points. Separate recovery of both blocks requires 0 < α j < 1, suf-ficient excitation, and structural identifiability; at an endpoint one block is unobserved. In a dense model with 0 < α < 1, the transformations 

W 7 → W + d1⊤, V 7 → V − α

1 − α d1⊤, (11) with 1⊤d = 0, preserve predictions whenever nonnegativity remains valid. Graph restrictions can remove this ambiguity; data coverage and constrained design rank must be checked. A prior can select among observationally equivalent blocks without making them data-identifiable. 

Proposition 2 (Common-schedule forgetting) . For two trajec-tories of Eq. (5) with the same regime sequence and inputs, 

∥pt − ept ∥1 ≤ αtp∥p0 − ep0∥1. (12) 

Moreover, on the zero-mass subspace, the restriction of P ν (u)

equals the restriction of αpWp,ν and is independent of constant u. Proof. The common input terms cancel, and column-stochastic matrices are nonexpansive in ℓ1. Iterate this inequality. For 

1⊤z = 0, the rank-one input term satisfies (Vp,ν u)1⊤z = 0. Strict forgetting requires αp < 1. Different state-dependent switches or feedback inputs invalidate the cancellation unless separately controlled. Thus within this additive prototype, changing a constant allocation can change output localization and the stationary law without changing fixed-regime zero-mass modes. This dynamical observation is distinct from stability of the identification algorithm. 

# B Acceptability under residual uncertainty 

The primary decision need not maximize target probabil-ity [10]. Let EH be a specified achievement event and BH an unsustainable-cost event over horizon H. These can represent hitting, sustained performance, cumulative budget exceedance, or persistent adverse operation. For available information I ,write 

RH (π) = Pr (EH | I , π), (13) 

CH (π) = Pr (BH | I , π). (14) Given an implementable policy class Π(I ), an aspiration threshold α, and a tolerable risk β , define 

A = {π ∈ Π(I ) : RH (π) ≥ α, CH (π) ≤ β }. (15) The primary task is to find an element of A . Cost, complexity, or implementation preferences may subsequently distinguish acceptable strategies. Thresholds are context-dependent and are not silently relaxed when no strategy can be certified. The separate constraints imply only Pr (EH ∩ BcH | I , π) ≥ max (0, α − β ). (16) A stronger joint requirement must be stated separately. Marginal laws qt , vt alone do not determine these path probabilities. A joint process model, with event flags or accumulators where needed, is required. 3More generally, the achievement and cost events need not be singular or evaluated over the full horizon. Given finite index sets I, J, coordinate subsets Ci, C j, and time subsets 

Ti, Tj ⊆ { 1, . . . , H}, define achievement probabilities Ri(π) = 

Pr (Ei | I , π) and cost-event probabilities Cj(π) = Pr (B j | I , π)

for events restricted to (Ti, Ci) and (Tj, C j) respectively. The generalized acceptability region is 

AT = {π ∈ Π(I ) : Ri(π) ≥ αi ∀i ∈ I, Cj(π) ≤ β j ∀ j ∈ J},

(17) recovering Eq. (15) as the singleton case I = J = {1}, T1 = {H}.Achievement and avoidance restrictions remain separate rather than combined into a single weighted score, so that a shortfall in one cannot be offset by a surplus in another. Proposition 4 ap-plies componentwise to each (Ri, δRi ) and (Cj, δCj ) pair without change of form. Distinct operating circumstances may justify a finite family of declared decision postures h ∈ H , with posture-specific thresh-olds (α(h), β (h)) and acceptability regions A (h). The active posture must be selected from pre-action information by an au-ditable rule before policy comparison. It cannot be chosen after optimization merely because another posture yields a desirable candidate. This construction represents context-dependent risk tolerance without silently relaxing an unsuccessful certificate. 

Definition 2 (Decision sufficiency relative to acceptability) . For fixed information, policy class, events, horizon, and thresholds, a representation is sufficient for acceptability classification if it preserves membership in A . A weaker selection requirement is to certify at least one implementable policy in A , even if other policies remain unresolved. 

This target-relative requirement does not demand exact re-construction of every internal transition. Consider estimated event probabilities bRH , bCH . The nominal acceptability region under the estimated model is 

cA0 = {π ∈ Π(I ) : bRH (π) ≥ α, bCH (π) ≤ β }. (18) Membership in cA0 is a model-relative statement and is not yet a certificate for membership in A . Suppose instead that justified, possibly policy-dependent bounds satisfy 

|RH (π) − bRH (π)| ≤ δR(π), |CH (π) − bCH (π)| ≤ δC(π).

(19) The corresponding certified region is 

cAδ = {π ∈ Π(I ) : bRH (π) − δR(π) ≥ α,

bCH (π) + δC(π) ≤ β }. (20) Thus cAδ ⊆ cA0, and valid bounds imply cAδ ⊆ A on their cov-erage event. The following result supplies one conservative source of such margins for the pointwise criteria used below. Let 

Mj,ν = [ Wj,ν Vj,ν ] and bMj,ν denote true and estimated column-stochastic operators, and assume 

∥ bMj,ν − Mj,ν ∥1 ≤ ε j,ν , j ∈ { p, q, v}. (21) 

Proposition 3 (Finite-horizon open-loop propagation) . Con-sider true and estimated trajectories with a common prescribed regime sequence and common open-loop inputs. If e t = ∥ bpt −

pt ∥1, then et+1 ≤ αpet + εp,νt , (22) 

∥bqt − qt ∥1 ≤ αqet + εq,νt , (23) 

∥bvt − vt ∥1 ≤ αvet + εv,νt . (24) 

Consequently, et ≤ αtpe0 +

> t−1

# ∑

> k=0

αt−1−kp εp,νk . (25) 

For any return category a, cost category b, terminal index T , and evaluation set S, 

|bqT [a] − qT [a]| ≤ 12 (αqeT + εq,νT ) = : δR, (26) 

max  

> t∈S

bvt [b] − max  

> t∈S

vt [b] ≤ 12 max  

> t∈S

(αvet + εv,νt ) = : δC. (27) 

Proof. For the state recursion, add and subtract 

bMp,νt [αp p⊤ 

> t

, (1 − αp)u⊤ 

> t

]⊤.

Column-stochasticity makes bMp,νt nonexpansive in ℓ1, the com-mon input components cancel, and Eq. (21) bounds the re-maining model discrepancy. The output inequalities follow identically. Iteration gives Eq. (25). Finally, the difference of two probability vectors has zero total mass, so every coordinate difference is bounded by one half of its ℓ1 norm; the maximum functional is nonexpansive in the uniform norm. The result is conditional on common inputs and regimes. Feedback, state-dependent regime disagreement, hitting events, and cumulative events require separate propagation arguments. Large coefficient-level bounds may also be conservative when observationally equivalent operators predict similarly on the excited domain. Tighter bounds valid only on a declared finite policy class remain sufficient for classification, but their scope must be reported. 

Proposition 4 (Acceptability margins) . A policy is certified acceptable if 

bRH (π) − δR(π) ≥ α, bCH (π) + δC(π) ≤ β . (28) 

It is certified unacceptable if bRH (π) + δR(π) < α or bCH (π) −

δC(π) > β . Otherwise these bounds leave its status unresolved. Proof. The lower achievement bound and upper risk bound imply both defining inequalities of A . Conversely, either stated rejection condition forces violation of at least one inequality. Equality at a threshold remains admissible. This elementary implication is conditional on valid error bounds, not a method for obtaining them. Statistical bounds certify the conclusion on their coverage event. Coverage un-certainty is distinct from operational risk β ; data-dependent policy selection requires simultaneous coverage or independent 4validation of the selected policy. Representation and estimation errors must both be addressed. Residual uncertainty is allowed. No universal entropy-minimization objective is imposed on u, p, q, v. Entropy alone does not distinguish desirable from undesirable categories: permuting their probabilities preserves entropy while changing target probability. Enrichment is useful here when it resolves an acceptability margin or enables a less costly acceptable policy, not merely when it concentrates a distribution. 

# C Negotiation regions and near-optimal refer-ence sets 

Optimization remains useful as a reference. Let z = ( π, ξ ) com-bine an implementable strategy and negotiable terms, such as resource budgets, participation commitments, and delivery win-dows [14]. Let F encode nonnegotiable feasibility conditions, and let Ai be party i’s acceptance region, including achievement and cost-risk thresholds where appropriate. Define 

N = F ∩

> M\
> i=1

Ai. (29) For a declared common criterion J, a reference and near-optimal negotiation set are 

J⋆ = sup 

> z∈N

J(z), (30) 

Nε = {z ∈ N : J(z) ≥ J⋆ − ε}. (31) Without an agreed scalar criterion, parties can instead compare multiple objectives and concessions [15]. Near-optimality does not itself relax feasibility or risk constraints. A neighborhood in objective value need not be a geometric ball in allocation space: nearby allocations may have different consequences, while dis-tant allocations may have similar values. A surrogate estimates these regions; it does not establish real-world feasibility without appropriate validation. For illustration, participation requirements x1 + x2 ≤

0.50 and 0 .10 ≤ x2 ≤ 0.15 permit the boundary segment 

(x1, x2) = ( 0.38 − δ , 0.12 + δ ) for −0.02 ≤ δ ≤ 0.03. The point (0.38 , 0.12 ) is only a stipulated optimum until J is spec-ified. Value loss along this segment must be evaluated, not inferred from compositional distance. Supplier participation can be negotiated over an operating window rather than at each order. For allocated volume bt ,¯ui,H = ∑H−1 

> t=0

bt ui,t

∑H−1 

> t=0

bt

, ∑

> t

bt > 0. (32) Expected randomized participation, realized volume share, and expenditure share are distinct. Personal resource negotiation similarly concerns task-specific preparation under time and recovery constraints, rather than maximal physical performance. Preparation and successful task completion remain different events. When only the fitted criterion bJ is used for ranking, define 

cN model  

> ε,δ

=

z ∈ cAδ : bJ(z) ≥ sup  

> z′∈cAδ

bJ(z′) − ε

 . (33) Every member is certified acceptable, but the near-optimal rank-ing is model-relative and compares only policies already in 

cAδ .

Proposition 5 (Finite-class ε-optimality certificate) . Consider a finite structurally feasible candidate class with simultaneous objective intervals [LJ (z),UJ (z)] . Let P contain all candidates not certified unacceptable and set U⋆ = max  

> z∈P

UJ (z). (34) 

On the simultaneous-coverage event, any certified-acceptable candidate satisfying U⋆ − LJ (z) ≤ ε (35) 

is ε-optimal relative to all truly acceptable candidates in the finite class. Proof. Every truly acceptable candidate remains in P, so its true objective is at most U⋆. The candidate in Eq. (35) has true objective at least LJ (z); hence its loss relative to the best truly acceptable candidate is at most U⋆ − LJ (z) ≤ ε.For J = RH , the objective intervals are [LR,UR]. The certifi-cate is deliberately conservative because unresolved but truly unacceptable candidates may raise U⋆. It is not an optimality claim over policies outside the declared finite class. 

# D Stochastic feedback closure and certified feed-back feasibility 

The primary prototype in Eq. (5) allows ut to be selected by a general implementable policy. This subsection identifies a distinguished subclass in which the same allocation variable is generated by stochastic feedback from the controller-accessible localization ¯ pt . In the fully observed case ¯ pt = pt ; under partial observation, ¯ pt must be supplied by the declared estimator in Eq. (2). Let ðs,2 denote the reduced stochastic embedding of degree at most two introduced in Ref. [2] (Eqs. 16–20 there), with 

s = ( s1, s2, s3) ∈ { 0, 1}3 selecting the linear block, the quadratic block, and a constant term respectively. The SSRC reduction matrix Rs,p(n) aggregates permutation-equivalent coordinates of x⊗k for every selected order k ≤ p; thus it removes the re-peated tensor words before identification. In general, the result-ing ambient dimension is 

ds,p = sp+1 +

> p

# ∑

> k=1

sk

n + k − 1

k



, (36) and for s = ( 1, 1, 0) it is ds = n +  n+12

. Write ð2 := ðs,2 for this typical choice. This tensor reduction does not remove algebraic relations created by restricting several degree blocks to the simplex. For example, ∑ j p j = 1 implies 

pi = p2 

> i

+ ∑ 

> j̸=i

pi p j, (37) 5with the coefficients adjusted to the multiplicity scaling used by Rs,2(n). More generally, a monomial of degree k < p can be homogenized on the simplex by multiplication by (∑i pi)p−k =

1. Consequently, if the complete degree-p block is active, the functional span of all selected blocks on ∆n−1 has dimension at most  n+p−1

> p

 even when the reduced ambient dimension in Eq. (36) is larger. These are domain-induced cross-degree relations, not tensor-product redundancies. For each regime ν, let Kν ∈ Sm,ds (R) be column-stochastic, and define 

ut = Kνt ð2( ¯pt ). (38) Substituting Eq. (38) in Eq. (5) gives the closed-loop switched model 

pt+1 = αpWp,νt pt + ( 1 − αp)Vp,νt Kνt ð2( ¯pt ), (39) and analogously for qt , vt , since ut enters through the same Vj,ν

block in each equation. 

Proposition 6 (Stochastic closure) . If ¯pt ∈ ∆n−1, ð2 : ∆n−1 →

∆ds−1 is stochastic, and K ν ∈ Sm,ds (R) for every ν, then u t ∈

∆m−1. In the fully observed case ¯pt = pt , the closed-loop recur-sion above is a well-posed stochastic recursion on ∆n−1, with qt , vt likewise remaining in their respective simplices. Under partial observation, the same conclusion holds for the plant state when the recursion is coupled to a declared filter that returns ¯pt ∈ ∆n−1.Proof. 1⊤ut = 1⊤Kνt ð2( ¯pt ) = 1⊤ð2( ¯pt ) = 1, and ut ≥ 0 since 

Kνt and ð2( ¯pt ) are nonnegative. The claim follows because pt+1

is a convex combination of stochastic vectors under column-stochastic maps. In the partially observed case, the declared filtering recursion supplies the additional state needed for causal propagation. This substitution invalidates the cancellation used in Proposi-tion 2, since ut now depends on the trajectory through ¯ pt rather than being common and externally fixed; this is exactly the feedback case excluded from that cancellation. The substitution identifies a policy subclass 

Π(s) 

> K

(I ) := {πK : ut = Kνt ð2( ¯pt ),

Kν ∈ Sm,ds (R) ∀ν} ⊂ Π(I ), (40) of regime-indexed, graph-structured stochastic quadratic feed-back policies. Π(s) 

> K

is not asserted to exhaust Π(I ); it is an additional implementable class that can be tested for member-ship in A alongside the constant-allocation candidates already considered. For any policy with the event-probability bounds in Eq. (19), define its conservative acceptability slack by 

ρ(π) = min 

n bRH (π) − δR(π) − α, β − bCH (π) − δC(π)

o

.

(41) Thus ρ(π) ≥ 0 is equivalent to the acceptance certificate in Proposition 4. For a declared feedback family CK ⊆ Π(s) 

> K

(I ),write 

ρ⋆ 

> CK

= sup  

> πK∈CK

ρ(πK ), (42) using a maximum when CK is finite. 

Definition 3 (η-certified feedback feasibility) . For fixed in-formation, events, horizon, thresholds, error bounds, and a declared feedback family CK ⊆ Π(s) 

> K

(I ), the family is η-certifiably feasible, for η ≥ 0, if ρ⋆ 

> CK

≥ η; equivalently, some 

πK ∈ CK satisfies ρ(πK ) ≥ η.

Here η is a required nonnegative robustness reserve in proba-bility units, not a permitted constraint violation. The case η = 0recovers ordinary certified acceptability. This notion is deliber-ately family-relative: failure for CK says nothing about Π(I )

or even about untested members of Π(s) 

> K

(I ), consistent with the target-relative treatment of decision sufficiency in Definition 2. A vector of constraint-specific reserves can replace the scalar minimum when return and cost margins should not be treated symmetrically. This definition concerns certified feasibility, not state- or distribution-reachability controllability. 

Identification of Kν . Two complementary routes are avail-able, and the framework does not privilege one over the other. 

(i) Estimation from data. Given observed pairs (pt , ut ) with 

νt = ν, set zt = ð2(pt ), Tν = {t : νt = ν}, Nν = |Tν |, and form the data matrices 

Uν = [ ut ]t∈Tν , Zν = [ zt ]t∈Tν . (43) Let Kν = ( span BS,ν (m, ds)) ∩ Sm,ds (R) denote the column-stochastic matrices supported by the regime-specific relational graph GS,ν . The graph-constrained least-squares estimate is 

bKν ∈ arg min 

> K∈Kν

1

Nν

∥Uν − KZ ν ∥2

> F

= arg min 

> K∈Kν

1

Nν ∑

> t∈Tν

∥ut − Kz t ∥22. (44) Thus residuals are penalized sample by sample. The norm of their sum is not used, since positive and negative residuals from different observations could cancel. The constrained problem can be assembled with the same graph-supported design used in Sec. II.A, with nonnegativity and unit column sums imposed on 

K. Unequal-precision observations can instead use a declared weighted sum of squared residuals; allocation counts may be fitted by an appropriate multinomial likelihood. No equality constraint is imposed across regimes: bKν is esti-mated independently for each ν, and a complete GS,ν recovers the dense feasible class. Unique recovery requires the sam-pled reduced embedding to distinguish all feasible coefficient directions. In particular, the specialization of Proposition 1 is 

DZ ν = 0, D ∈ par (Kν ) =⇒ D = 0, (45) where par (Kν ) is the linear space of support-admissible, zero-column-sum differences. If this condition fails, distinct feasible controllers can be observationally equivalent on the training design; held-out functional prediction may still be accurate on a declared domain. Even arbitrarily rich sampling of the simplex cannot distinguish a direction that annihilates the en-tire set ð2(∆n−1). For n = 4 and s = ( 1, 1, 0), tensor reduc-tion has already reduced the embedding from 4 + 42 = 20 to 4 + 10 = 14 coordinates, while the four independent relations in Eq. (37) leave a 10-dimensional functional span. Thus a 6dense Kν ∈ Sm,14 (R) is generally identifiable only up to its action on that embedded domain unless further structure se-lects a realization. Approximate persistence across regimes, when observed, is therefore an empirical finding rather than an identifying restriction. When a lower-dimensional parametrization Kν = Lν (θν ) is declared, estimation should be performed in that parametriza-tion rather than in an ambient realization containing domain-induced null directions. In the personal laboratory below, θν =

Aν ∈ Sm,n(R) and the canonical lifting satisfies Lν (Aν )ð2(p) = 

Aν p. Consequently, with Pν = [ pt ]t∈Tν , the implemented exact-data fit is the special case 

bAν ∈ arg min 

> A∈Sm,n(R)

1

Nν

∥Uν − AP ν ∥2 

> F

, bKν = Lν ( bAν ). (46) The full-row-rank design used there makes the unconstrained least-squares solution unique; because the data are generated exactly by a feasible stochastic Aν , it coincides with the con-strained solution up to floating-point cleanup. 

(ii) Supplied candidates. K ν may equally be elicited from a Bayesian prior over column-stochastic matrices or supplied from declared operator experience. The certification stage (Proposition 4, instantiated with Π(s) 

> K

) treats any such candi-date identically to an estimated one, requiring only that Kν be column-stochastic and, when a structural restriction is declared, graph-admissible. Residual uncertainty from route (i) and lack of certified feasi-bility within a declared feedback family are distinct conclusions and should not be conflated when reporting ρ(πK ) or ρ⋆ 

> CK

.More generally, two controllers Kν , K′ 

> ν

that are far apart as column-stochastic matrices may induce similar, or jointly ad-missible, localization trajectories on a declared subset T of times and coordinates. This disassociation between distance in policy and distance in outcome, already noted for constant allocations in Sec. II.C, extends naturally to Π(s) 

> K

; formaliz-ing an outcome-level equivalence over T and a corresponding minimal-complexity selection criterion among certified candi-dates is left as an open direction. 

# III Identification and synthesis algo-rithm 

Algorithm 1 joins the two computational stages without conflat-ing their purposes. The first estimates regime-local stochastic operators and checks whether the excited data support predic-tion at the resolution needed for decision classification. The second propagates candidate strategies, applies conservative return–cost margins, and constructs the negotiable set. Con-sequently, failure to certify a strategy is an admissible output rather than an instruction to relax the declared thresholds. The propagation step may use marginal qt , vt for pointwise criteria or an augmented joint model for hitting and cumula-tive events. Priors can regularize the identification stage, but they do not remove observational equivalence created by insuf-ficient excitation. The model-relative near-optimal calculation is performed only after structural feasibility and conservative acceptability have been imposed. The stronger finite-class cer-tificate additionally uses Proposition 5; it may be empty even when certified acceptable references exist. Algorithm 1 separates five conclusions that should not be conflated. A successful stochastic fit establishes a predictive representation only on the excited and validated domain. Mem-bership in cA (h) 

> 0

establishes nominal acceptability under the fitted model, whereas a nonempty cA (h) 

> δ

establishes that at least one candidate is certified under the declared information, pos-ture, policy class, horizon, and margins. Candidates between the acceptance and rejection margins remain unresolved. The set cN model  

> ε,δ

ranks certified candidates using the fitted criterion, while cN cert  

> ε,δ

supplies the stronger finite-class guarantee when objective intervals permit it. Neither repairs an inadequate repre-sentation or converts an unacceptable policy into an acceptable one. This ordering makes the returned diagnostics part of the decision result rather than ancillary numerical output. The two early returns also have different meanings. Failure in Stage I leaves the decision unresolved because the available representation cannot support classification near the relevant boundary. Failure in Stage II is stronger but still conditional: the tested policy class contains no certified candidate under the present constraints. In practice, the former calls for new exci-tation, observations, regime labels, graph revision, or state en-richment. The latter calls for revising the implementable policy class, resource limits, or negotiated thresholds only when such a revision is substantively justified. Keeping both outcomes explicit prevents an optimizer from silently compensating for an identification failure. 

# IV Scope of switching and enrichment 

The regime index and the enrichment index serve different purposes. Switching selects among locally affine stochastic maps as operating conditions change; in the fully observed case, pre-action state-dependent switching produces the piecewise-affine nonlinear evolution described above. Enrichment refines a state when residence history or additional observations reveal decision-relevant internal levels. It should be retained only when the refinement changes prediction near an acceptance boundary or permits a less costly acceptable strategy. Spectral and pseudospectral diagnostics can support that assessment, but they do not by themselves establish predictive closure or decision sufficiency [2]. Operationally, the current regime may be prescribed, inferred before control selection, or generated by an observed pre-action state–context rule. An action-dependent rule instead updates the next regime, as specified by the causal convention in Eq. (2). These cases produce the same conditional propagation once 

νt is fixed, but they carry different uncertainty. If regime clas-sification is estimated, its error must enter validation or the acceptance margins; it cannot be absorbed into the local opera-tor error without justification. Similarly, enrichment should be evaluated under the same downstream criterion used for the de-cision. A refinement that changes eigenvalue or pseudospectral diagnostics but leaves every relevant return and cost classifica-7Algorithm 1: Regime-wise identification and negotiable IDS synthesis 

Input: Data D = {(pt , ut , pt+1, qt , vt , νt )}; supports G j,ν ; weights α j; policy class Π; horizon H; declared posture h with thresholds 

(r(h)

> min

, c(h)

> max

); tolerance ε.

Output: Identified operators and diagnostics; nominal, certified, unresolved, model-relative near-optimal, and, when available, finite-class ε-optimal-certified regions; an implementable reference. 

// Stage I: identify and validate regime-local dynamics  

> 1

foreach regime ν and output j ∈ { p, q, v} do  

> 2

Form z j,t = [ α j p⊤ 

> t

, (1 − α j)u⊤ 

> t

]⊤ for samples with νt = ν; 

> 3

Fit bMj,ν = [ bWj,ν bVj,ν ] by graph-supported nonnegative least squares with unit column sums;  

> 4

Record held-out error, constrained design rank, and conditioning;  

> 5

if validation is inadequate near a decision boundary then  

> 6

return unresolved representation; revise data, regimes, graph, or enrichment ;

// Stage II: synthesize a negotiable IDS  

> 7

foreach implementable π ∈ Π do  

> 8

Propagate bpt , bqt , bvt and estimate ( bRH , bCH , δR, δC); 

> 9

cA (h) 

> 0

← { π : bRH (π) ≥ r(h)

> min

, bCH (π) ≤ c(h)

> max

}; 

> 10

cA (h) 

> δ

← { π : bRH (π) − δR ≥ r(h)

> min

, bCH (π) + δC ≤ c(h)

> max

}; 

> 11

Classify remaining candidates as certified unacceptable or unresolved using Proposition 4;  

> 12

if cA (h) 

> δ

= ∅ then  

> 13

return no IDS certified under the declared information and constraints ; 

> 14

cN model  

> ε,δ

← { π ∈ cA (h) 

> δ

: bJ(π) ≥ sup π′∈ cA (h)

> δ

bJ(π′) − ε}; 

> 15

if Π is finite and simultaneous objective intervals are available then  

> 16

P ← { π : π is not certified unacceptable }; 

> 17

U⋆ ← max π∈P UJ (π); 

> 18

cN cert  

> ε,δ

← { π ∈ cA (h) 

> δ

: U⋆ − LJ (π) ≤ ε}; 

> 19

return operators, diagnostics, classification regions, both near-optimal sets when defined, and a certified reference ;

tion unchanged has diagnostic value, yet supplies no decision advantage in the declared problem. 

# V Reproducible numerical laboratories 

All parameters below are synthetic. No physiological or com-mercial calibration is asserted. The known-matrix calibration and the three application prototypes use distinct parameteriza-tions and outcome definitions; their absolute scores are therefore not directly comparable. Replication bars and boxes report de-scriptive medians and quartiles unless stated otherwise; they are not guarantees about model validity. 

# A Known switched matrices and SSRC calibra-tion 

The new primary calibration instantiates Eq. (5) with four in-ternal states, three inputs, three return categories, three cost categories, and two observed regimes. Mixing coefficients are 

(0.65 , 0.70 , 0.80 ). Sparse graph supports and all true matrices are provided in the reproducibility package. For each regime, 240 independent probability-state/input pairs are generated by controlled initialization; input probabilities are exact. Output counts use ensembles of 2000. Thus this experiment tests out-put sampling noise, not errors in measured inputs or unknown regime classification. Using noiseless outputs, the maximum induced-ℓ1 matrix error is about 10 −14 for the declared sparse supports. With multinomial outputs, held-out mean probability errors in the reported fit range from approximately 0.0021 to 0.0038. Twenty independent noisy fits probe variability under this same design, as shown in Fig. 2. These observations support numerical ade-quacy for this example; the normal-equation construction and its conditioning do not justify a universal stability claim. For control, fix a 12-step schedule alternating regimes in blocks of three and optimize constant allocations subject to 

u1 + u2 ≤ 0.50, 0 .10 ≤ u2 ≤ 0.15. The target criterion is the last contemporaneous return probability; risk is the maximum of the per-step undesirable-cost marginal, not a probability of ever encountering that cost. Thresholds are 0.25 and 0.35. The response is affine in constant u, allowing exact polygon clipping and vertex optimization rather than a sampled allocation grid. Known and identified models select (0.35 , 0.15 , 0.50 ). The identified model predicts target probability 0.35660; evaluation under the known model gives 0.35699 and maximum pointwise cost probability 0.16606. With ε = 0.02, the entire feasible allocation polygon is nominally near-optimal in both models. Because the generator is known, this is an ex post model com-parison, not a statistical certificate over the continuous polygon; obtaining simultaneous data-derived margins for that class is left open. This broad negotiation region is a result of this example’s objective variation and thresholds, not an assumed neighborhood around an isolated optimum. 8B Reproducible personal and inventory proto-types 

The first compact prototype uses four preparation states (low, developing, ready, and fatigued), three resource allocations (recovery, sustainable training, and demanding training), and or-dinary or assessment regimes. Synthetic collective frequencies emulate summaries that could be constructed from personal records, wearable-derived categories, or a suitably modeled community prior. Such pooled evidence is informative only under an explicit transportability assumption; the example does not treat people as automatically exchangeable. The second prototype uses four inventory states (healthy, normal, low, and pending/delayed), three allocations (flexible supplier, reliable supplier, and expedite/buffer), and ordinary or stressed demand [16]. Supplier-delay information is represented at this coarse resolution; delivery-age enrichment remains ap-propriate when elapsed time changes the arrival hazard enough to alter the negotiated choice. Both laboratories generate 260 state–input pairs per regime and output frequencies from ensembles of 2500 cases. Graph-supported nonnegative least squares imposes unit column sums as exact constraints. The constrained diagnostics apply Eq. (9): personal-state maps have zero restricted nullity, while their re-turn and cost maps have nullities one and two; inventory-state maps likewise have zero restricted nullity, while their return and cost maps have nullity two in each regime. Nevertheless, held-out mean ℓ1 prediction errors range from 0.0027 to 0.0060. This distinction matters: accurate predictions on the excited simplex do not establish unique recovery of every admissible edge weight. Direct worst-case bounds formed from full in-duced matrix errors are consequently too conservative here and classify every selected policy as unresolved. To expose the certification logic without disguising that limi-tation, the synthetic generator is used only for an oracle diag-nostic on each declared finite candidate class. The simultaneous discrepancies 

δR = max  

> π∈Πf

|RH (π) − bRH (π)|, δC = max  

> π∈Πf

|CH (π) − bCH (π)|

(47) are exact over the enumerated class Π f . They certify the re-ported finite-class classifications deterministically for these syn-thetic experiments, but are not estimable guarantees for an applied data set. Personal allocations satisfy sustainable-training shares in 

[0.25 , 0.55 ] and demanding-training shares no larger than 0.25. Acceptance requires terminal high-success probability at least 0.25 and maximum pointwise unsustainable-burden probabil-ity at most 0.18. The finite-class oracle discrepancies are 

δR = 0.001240 and δC = 0.001116. Of 195 grid-feasible alloca-tions, 44 are nominally acceptable, 39 are certified acceptable, 10 are unresolved, and 146 are certified unacceptable. Among the certified policies, 23 lie within ε = 0.02 of the best fitted re-turn; 18 also satisfy the stronger finite-class certificate in Propo-sition 5. The selected certified reference is (0.28 , 0.54 , 0.18 ) for recovery, sustainable training, and demanding training. Its fitted terminal target probability is 0.27783 and its conservative lower bound is 0.27659; its fitted maximum burden is 0.17703 and its conservative upper bound is 0.17815. Its limiting constraint is cost, giving ρ = 0.00185. Inventory allocations require the flexible and reliable shares to total at most 0.60, with reliable participation in [0.15 , 0.30 ].Both declared postures require terminal high-service probabil-ity at least 0.48 and use ε = 0.015; the prudential posture sets the maximum pointwise unsustainable-cost probability at 0.22, whereas the continuity-operational posture uses 0.24. The pos-ture is selected before optimization from the business context; the second ceiling is not introduced after a failed certificate. Here δR = 0.003102 and δC = 0.001327. Under the prudential posture, of 616 feasible allocations, 50 are nominally acceptable, 28 are certified acceptable, 53 are unresolved, and 535 are certified unacceptable. Twenty-five certified policies are model-relative ε-near-optimal, while one satisfies the stronger finite-class ε-optimality certificate. The nominal maximizer (0.14 , 0.30 , 0.56 ) is unresolved because its conservative cost upper bound is 0.2203. The selected certified reference is (0.15 , 0.30 , 0.55 ), with fitted terminal high-service probability 0.49897, conservative lower bound 0.49586, fitted maximum cost 0.21778, and conservative upper bound 0.21910. Its cost-limited certified slack is ρ = 0.00090. Under the continuity-operational posture, 303 allocations are nominally acceptable, 275 are certified acceptable, 57 are unresolved, and 284 are certified unacceptable. Thirty-one certified policies are model-relative ε-near-optimal and ten sat-isfy the stronger certificate. The selected operational reference is (0, 0.28 , 0.72 ), with fitted terminal high-service probability 0.55129, conservative lower bound 0.54819, fitted maximum cost 0.23832, and conservative upper bound 0.23965. Its cer-tified slack is ρ = 0.00035. Thus a predeclared willingness to tolerate two additional probability points of pointwise cost risk permits a materially more active high-service allocation while retaining a positive certificate. These thresholds are illus-trative preferences and the cost constraints concern marginal probabilities, not pathwise hitting events. Figure 1 is the central numerical synthesis. Panel (a) distinguishes acceptability certification, model-relative near-optimality, and the stronger finite-class certificate in the personal laboratory. Panel (b) connects the selected personal allocation to its time-dependent return and burden localizations. Panel (c) contrasts the prudential and continuity-operational inventory postures, including their different certified references and stronger ε-optimal subsets. Panel (d) maps both references back to implementable supplier shares. Together, the panels dis-play the proposed IDS chain from stochastic representation to a context-declared negotiable decision under residual uncertainty. 

# C Stochastic feedback closure: two certified feedback laboratories 

Sec. II.D and the compact prototypes above are combined here: for each prototype, a regime-indexed stochastic quadratic feed-back controller ut = Kνt ð2( ¯pt ) is constructed and evaluated against the same acceptance thresholds used for the personal and prudential-inventory constant-allocation references. In these fully observed synthetic laboratories, ¯ pt = pt . Route (i) (estima-9Figure 1: Reproducible compact IDS prototypes with finite-class oracle bounds. (a) Personal return–burden classification; open blue circles show model-relative near-optimal policies and open black diamonds show the stronger certified ε-optimal subset. (b) Trajectories under the selected certified personal allocation; dotted lines show its thresholds. (c) Inventory classification under the prudential ceiling 0 .22 and continuity-operational ceiling 0 .24: green points are prudentially certified, blue points are certified only under the operational posture, diamonds and squares mark the respective strongly certified ε-optimal subsets, and stars mark their references. (d) Both inventory references in allocation space. The posture is declared before policy comparison. Bounds are exact synthetic finite-class diagnostics, not empirical coverage guarantees. tion from data) is used for the personal-preparation prototype and route (ii) (supplied candidates) for the inventory prototype. Exact simultaneous oracle discrepancies are computed over the two declared feedback candidates in each laboratory. For the personal-preparation prototype, the controller is pa-rameterized by a stochastic per-state preference matrix Aν ∈

R3×4. Its canonical degree-two realization satisfies K⋆ 

> ν

ð2(p) = 

Aν p on ∆3. Exact synthetic pairs include the simplex ver-tices and interior samples, giving a rank-4 design for the mini-mal parametrization. The samplewise Frobenius least-squares fit in Eq. (46) recovers Aν with maximum coefficient error 3.33 ×10 −16 and reconstructs bKν with worst-case held-out func-tional error 5 .59 × 10 −16 . The generating and identified closed-loop trajectories differ by at most 2 .22 × 10 −16 , so a numerical tolerance of 10 −12 is used when comparing the exact benchmark. Thus the structured feedback law, rather than every coefficient of an unrestricted dense 3 × 14 representation, is exactly identi-fiable on the declared domain. Over the declared two-candidate feedback family, δR = 0.000883 and δC = 0.001135. For the identified controller, bRH = 0.25764 and bCH = 0.16384; the con-servative values are 0.25676 and 0.16497, respectively. Hence 

ρ = 0.00676, and this finite family is η-certifiably feasible for every 0 ≤ η ≤ 0.00676. For the inventory prototype, the declared two-candidate feed-back family has oracle discrepancies δR = 0.002495 and δC =

0.000855. A first controller supplied from a stated purchasing-team escalation rule (route ii, no estimation) is certified unac-ceptable: its fitted terminal service probability is 0.42721 and even its upper bound, 0.42970, is below 0.48; its fitted maxi-mum cost is 0.19360, and ρ = −0.05529. A single revision of the same rule, shifting escalation weight toward the reliable and expedite suppliers, is certified acceptable: bRH = 0.49997 with 10 Figure 2: Primary switched-additive calibration. (a) Median and interquartile range of held-out probability errors over 20 noisy SSRC fits, shown by regime and output. These bars are variability summaries, not confidence guarantees. (b) Constant-allocation negotiation polygon colored by known-model target probability. Known and identified feasible boundaries coincide, and the star marks their common selected optimum. The full polygon is 0 .02-near-optimal under both models. lower bound 0.49748, and bCH = 0.21314 with upper bound 0.21400. Evaluation under the generator gives 0.50172 and 0.21229, respectively. The revised rule has ρ = 0.00600, so the tested family is η-certifiably feasible for 0 ≤ η ≤ 0.00600. This is the intended use of certification for a supplied candidate: identical to an estimated one, and no more exempt from failing it. Figure 3 compares, for each prototype, the certified closed-loop trajectory against the certified open-loop constant-allocation reference of Fig. 1(b,d). In both cases the point-wise cost ceiling is satisfied throughout the horizon and the favorable-return threshold is satisfied at the terminal period. The personal-preparation controller is the exactly identified realization described above and maintains a visibly larger margin below the burden ceiling than the open-loop reference. The revised inventory rule closely tracks its open-loop refer-ence after certification. Neither comparison establishes that closed-loop feedback dominates constant allocation in general; it shows that both policy forms contain certified alternatives in these laboratories. 

# D Noisy feedback identification for customer-retention allocation 

The exact personal benchmark is complemented by a third syn-thetic laboratory in which feedback observations are noisy. This example concerns sequential allocation of a limited retention-intervention capacity, not standalone churn prediction. Four portfolio localizations represent stable, vulnerable, at-risk, and disengaged customers; three allocation categories represent routine service, personalized contact, and retention incentives. Return categories distinguish lost, retained, and expanded rela-tionships, while cost categories distinguish low, moderate, and excessive intervention intensity. Ordinary and adverse commer-cial conditions define two observed regimes. For a prescribed mean allocation ut = Aνt pt , the observed executed share is generated by 

N eut ∼ Multinomial (N, ut ). (48) Return and cost localizations are observed analogously as multi-nomial event frequencies conditional on (pt , eut ). The state localization and regime are observed without noise, deliberately excluding partial observation from this experiment. For each regime, Aν is estimated from 160 state–allocation pairs by the constrained samplewise loss in Eq. (46); graph-supported re-turn and cost maps are estimated from the corresponding event frequencies. Thirty independent replications are performed for 

N ∈ { 100 , 500 , 2500 }, with 2000 independently sampled state localizations per regime for functional evaluation. The median held-out mean ℓ1 error of the feedback law de-creases from 0.01606 to 0.00714 and 0.00339 as N increases. Median on-trajectory oracle discrepancies in terminal return de-crease from 0.00285 to 0.00128 and 0.00053; the corresponding maximum-cost discrepancies decrease from 0.00142 to 0.00084 and 0.00043. With illustrative thresholds 0.183 for terminal favorable return and 0.112 for maximum pointwise excessive cost, 17, 18, and 27 of the 30 fitted policies are oracle-certified acceptable, while 13, 12, and 3 remain unresolved. None is certified unacceptable. Figure 4 separates policy-function recovery from decision classification. The minimal controller design has zero restricted nullity, whereas each graph-supported return and cost design 11 Figure 3: Certified open-loop references versus certified closed-loop feedback. (a) Personal preparation: constant allocation 

u⋆ (dashed) and the exactly identified structured controller bKν (route i, solid). (b) Supplier participation under the prudential posture: constant allocation u⋆ (dashed) and the revised operator-supplied rule (route ii, solid). Dotted lines mark the terminal favorable-return thresholds and applicable pointwise cost ceilings. Certification uses exact oracle discrepancies over each declared finite synthetic class; these are diagnostic margins, not empirical coverage guarantees. has restricted nullity two in both regimes. The return and cost blocks fitted from closed-loop observations consequently retain substantially larger error on independently sampled off-policy actions, approximately 0.04–0.07 in mean ℓ1 error across these designs. This does not contradict the decreasing controller er-ror. Two limitations coexist: the additive W –V representation contains feasible observationally equivalent directions, and ac-tions generated from state do not independently cover arbitrary state–action combinations. Thus larger event counts improve the identified feedback law and its on-policy decision resolution without establishing unique coefficient recovery or unrestricted off-policy prediction. The exact discrepancies used for clas-sification remain synthetic oracle diagnostics, not empirical guarantees for a commercial application. 

# VI Discussion 

The central claim is not that every dynamic strategy possesses a unique stochastic matrix representation. It is that a struc-tured probability representation can be sufficient for a declared decision even when some coefficients remain observationally equivalent. That sufficiency is conditional on the operating regimes, the excited domain, the policy class, the horizon, the events, and the acceptance margins. Changing any of these elements may turn a previously harmless null direction into a decision-relevant discrepancy. Identification diagnostics are therefore part of the decision result rather than a preliminary numerical formality. This perspective separates three notions often conflated in data-driven control. Structural reduction removes repeated ten-sor words before fitting. Identifiability asks whether the obser-vations distinguish the remaining graph-admissible stochastic directions. Decision sufficiency asks whether any unresolved directions can change the classification of relevant policies. The personal benchmark illustrates the distinction cleanly: its 14-coordinate controller realization is already SSRC-reduced, yet cross-degree relations induced by the simplex make that ambi-ent realization nonunique. The minimal stochastic matrix Aν

remains identifiable and determines the same allocation func-tion. Thus a nonunique realization need not imply an ambiguous implemented policy. Probability readouts also place this work near stochastic reser-voir computing, where controlled Markov evolution can gen-erate rich probabilistic features and finite sampling creates a hardware–precision tradeoff [1]. The emphasis here is com-plementary. Universality concerns the expressive capacity of an architecture over a function class; IDS decision sufficiency concerns preservation of a particular acceptability classification under structural and statistical uncertainty. A universally ex-pressive class need not be identifiable from a given closed-loop experiment, while a nonunique fitted representation may still be sufficient for a narrow decision. The retention laboratory demonstrates the latter possibility: increasing multinomial sam-ple size improves the feedback function and reduces unresolved classifications, but does not remove intrinsic W –V equivalence or supply independent coverage of arbitrary actions. The same distinction matters for collective information in human-facing systems. Interindividual and intraindividual vari-12 Figure 4: Noisy customer-retention feedback laboratory over 30 independent replications. (a) Held-out functional error of the identified stochastic allocation law for multinomial sample sizes N = 100 , 500 , 2500. Boxes show quartiles and medians; whiskers use the standard 1.5 interquartile-range rule and outliers are omitted. (b) Classification of the fitted policies under exact two-candidate oracle discrepancies in each synthetic replication. Increasing event counts reduce unresolved classifications, but these oracle margins are not data-derived commercial guarantees. ability may represent adaptive or persistent organization rather than measurement noise [11]. Conversely, finite observations, devices, protocols, and classification rules introduce genuine measurement uncertainty. Pooling these components into one residual would obscure both transportability and certification. The personal laboratory therefore represents probability sum-maries for a declared population or individual information source; it does not assume exchangeability, infer neurophysio-logical mechanisms, or convert population frequencies automat-ically into individual guarantees. The notion of functional vi-cariance discussed in neurovariability provides a useful analogy: different internal configurations may support a similar function. In IDS terms, structurally different policies or operators can be outcome-equivalent on selected times and coordinates. This is a conceptual connection, not an asserted biological correspon-dence. Certification then determines what may responsibly be con-cluded from the representation. A fitted-model optimum is only nominal. An acceptable certificate additionally requires justified return and cost margins, while certified ε-optimality requires simultaneous objective intervals over the declared finite class. The two inventory postures show why thresholds must be fixed from auditable pre-action conditions rather than chosen after inspecting the optimizer. The feedback experiments make the same point about policy provenance: an estimated controller and an operator-supplied rule face identical tests. The first sup-plier rule is rejected before a revised rule is certified, whereas the noisy retention policies may remain unresolved instead of being forced into an accept/reject label. These distinctions also delimit the relation to stochastic opti-mal control. Chance-constrained and stochastic model predic-tive control methods optimize performance subject to proba-bilistic constraints [9]. The present framework does not replace those methods or establish recursive feasibility and closed-loop stability in their general sense. It supplies a structured represen-tation, a conservative classification interface, and a negotiable set from which optimization or operational judgment may select. Likewise, regime switching supplies local nonlinear expressive-ness but does not by itself validate a regime partition. State enrichment, additional regimes, or more complex feedback are warranted only when they improve prediction or resolve a deci-sion boundary. The evidence remains computational and synthetic. Ex-act oracle discrepancies make the finite-class logic auditable, but an application requires data-derived simultaneous bounds, observation and filtering models, validation of regime labels, and explicit separation of sampling error from structural het-erogeneity. Closed-loop deployment also requires stability and safety analysis beyond the stochastic closure proved here. Joint trajectory models are needed for hitting, persistence, and cumulative-cost events; marginal output distributions are in-sufficient. Natural extensions include active excitation un-der operational constraints, posterior or set-valued propaga-tion over observational-equivalence classes, outcome-level con-troller equivalence, minimal-complexity selection among certi-fied policies, information-acquisition costs, and adaptive rene-gotiation. 13 Data Availability Statement 

The numerical examples in this work are synthetic and require no external empirical data. The programs, executable IDS proto-type notebooks, saved numerical results, and figure-generation materials supporting this study will be made available in due course through the IntegratedDynamicStrategies GitHub repos-itory [17]. The extended manuscript and additional didactic experiments will also be maintained in that repository. All nu-merical examples reported in this work are synthetic and do not incorporate proprietary, client, or personal data. 

# Acknowledgments 

The author thanks colleagues and practitioners for observa-tions that helped motivate the inventory and customer-retention laboratories, and gratefully acknowledges the institutional sup-port provided by Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Honduras (UNAH). 

# References 

[1] Peter J. Ehlers, Hendra I. Nurdin, and Daniel Soh. Stochas-tic reservoir computers. Nature Communications , 16: 3070, 2025. doi: 10.1038/s41467-025-58349-6. URL 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-58349-6 .[2] Fredy Vides. Identifying probability localization dynamics via structured stochastic liftings, 2026. URL https:// arxiv.org/abs/2608.22686v1 . Version 1. [3] Lendy Banegas and Fredy Vides. Stochastically structured reservoir computers for financial and eco-nomic system identification. IFAC-PapersOnLine ,59(36):100–105, 2025. doi: 10.1016/j.ifacol.2026. 03.018. URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/ science/article/pii/S2405896326001084 .[4] James D. Hamilton. A new approach to the economic analysis of nonstationary time series and the business cycle. Econometrica , 57(2):357–384, 1989. doi: 10.2307/ 1912559. [5] Daniel Liberzon. Switching in Systems and Control . Sys-tems & Control: Foundations & Applications. Birkhäuser, Boston, 2003. [6] Simone Paoletti, Aleksandar Lj. Juloski, Giancarlo Ferrari-Trecate, and René Vidal. Identification of hybrid systems: A tutorial. European Journal of Control , 13(2–3):242–260, 2007. doi: 10.3166/ejc.13.242-260. [7] Lennart Ljung. System Identification: Theory for the User .Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2 edition, 1999. [8] Urban Forssell and Lennart Ljung. Closed-loop identifica-tion revisited. Automatica , 35(7):1215–1241, 1999. doi: 10.1016/S0005-1098(99)00022-9. [9] Ali Mesbah. Stochastic model predictive control: An overview and perspectives for future research. IEEE Control Systems Magazine , 36(6):30–44, 2016. doi: 10.1109/MCS.2016.2602087. [10] Herbert A. Simon. A behavioral model of rational choice. 

Quarterly Journal of Economics , 69(1):99–118, 1955. doi: 10.2307/1884852. [11] Stephanie J. Forkel, Lilit Dulyan, Kurt G. Schilling, and Michel Thiebaut de Schotten. Neurovariability as a signature of adaptive brain function. Brain Struc-ture and Function , 231:83, 2026. doi: 10.1007/ s00429-026-03138-0. URL https://doi.org/10. 1007/s00429-026-03138-0 .[12] Chen Jia, Da-Quan Jiang, and Min-Ping Qian. Cy-cle symmetries and circulation fluctuations for discrete-time and continuous-time Markov chains. The Annals of Applied Probability , 26(4):2454–2493, 2016. doi: 10.1214/15-AAP1152. [13] Charles L. Lawson and Richard J. Hanson. Solving Least Squares Problems . Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1974. [14] John F. Nash. The bargaining problem. Econometrica , 18 (2):155–162, 1950. doi: 10.2307/1907266. [15] Kaisa Miettinen. Nonlinear Multiobjective Optimization .Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston, 1999. [16] Paul H. Zipkin. Foundations of Inventory Management .McGraw-Hill, Boston, 2000. [17] Fredy Vides. IntegratedDynamicStrategies: Structured stochastic representations of integrated dynamic strate-gies. GitHub repository, 2026. https://github.com/ FredyVides/IntegratedDynamicStrategies .14