Title: DeformX: A Versatile Co-Simulation Framework for Deformable Linear Objects

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.22116v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 02:05:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
# DeformX: A Versatile Co-Simulation Framework for Deformable Linear Objects 

Project Page: deformx.github.io 

Yi Yang 1,3,4,†, Xiang Fei 1,†, Lehong Wang 1,†, Chenhao Li 2, Zilin Dai 5, Henry Kou 1,Lu Li 1, Howie Choset 1

Fig. 1: DeformX is a co-simulation framework for deformable linear objects (DLOs) that integrates NVIDIA Isaac Sim with a dedicated Cosserat rod engine, providing visually and physically realistic simulation. The framework enables scalable data generation and robot learning, supporting DLO perception and manipulation. 

Abstract — Deformable linear objects (DLOs) such as wires, cables, and ropes are common in robotic manipulation tasks, yet simulating them with both visual realism and physical accuracy remains challenging. Existing visual simulation meth-ods typically rely on procedural geometric primitives that lack physically grounded deformation behavior, while physics-based approaches with robot learning support often approximate DLOs as rigid-link chains or generic soft bodies, failing to accurately capture the bending, twisting, and shear mechanics of slender elastic structures. In this work, we introduce De-formX, a co-simulation framework that integrates a dedicated Cosserat rod physics engine with NVIDIA Isaac Sim, enabling DLO simulations that are both physically faithful and visually realistic. Our Cosserat rod engine simulates the dynamics and self-collisions of DLOs, and contact interactions with arbitrary free-form meshes. To achieve high-fidelity visualization, we employ mesh skinning to map discrete rod deformations onto imported CAD models. To the best of our knowledge, DeformX  

> †

Equal contribution; each reserves the right to be listed first.  

> 1

The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA.  

> 2

Department of Mechanical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes Ave, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA.  

> 3

School of Ocean and Civil Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Rd, Minhang District, Shanghai, China.  

> 4

Zhiyuan College, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 800 Dongchuan Rd, Minhang District, Shanghai, China.  

> 5

John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, 29 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA. 

is the one of the first frameworks for DLO simulation that unifies realistic visualization, principled physics, and com-patibility with robot learning pipelines. We demonstrate its versatility across synthetic data generation and policy learning for DLO manipulation, and validate visual and physical fidelity through comparisons against real-world experiments. Notably, fine-tuning Segment Anything Model 3 (SAM3) on DeformX-generated data yields a 10.2% mAP@75 improvement in real-image wire segmentation, and a rope-swinging policy trained entirely in DeformX achieves a mean target-hitting error of 6.6 cm on a UR5e manipulator in real-world trials, highlighting its strong sim-to-real transfer capability. 

I. INTRODUCTION Deformable linear objects (DLOs), including wires, cables, and ropes, are pervasive in robotics and industrial settings. They appear in applications such as wire harness assembly, cable routing, infrastructure inspection, and textile manipula-tion [1]. Accurate DLO simulation is therefore important for perception, planning, and control: a realistic simulator can enable scalable synthetic data generation for visual learning, support robot learning for manipulation policies, and reduce dependence on expensive and time-consuming real-world experimentation. Despite growing interest in DLO manipu-lation, existing approaches rarely satisfy three requirements simultaneously: (i) visual realism for perception, (ii) physical fidelity under gravity, contact, and manipulation, and (iii) 

> arXiv:2606.22116v1 [cs.RO] 20 Jun 2026

compatibility with robot learning frameworks for closed-loop training and evaluation. Most prior systems emphasize either visually plausible rendering with simplified dynamics or physically motivated models without an integrated, pho-torealistic robotics stack, which limits their utility for end-to-end perception and robot learning. Existing approaches to visually simulating DLOs primarily rely on procedural modeling tools such as Blender, where DLOs are generated as random B´ ezier curves or as chains of simple geometric primitives like connected cylinders [2], [3]. These methods can produce visually plausible cable shapes under controlled conditions and are often used to gener-ate synthetic datasets for training perception models [2]– [6], given the difficulty of collecting and annotating large-scale real-world wire data. For example, HANDLOOM [2] synthesizes 30,000 cable images for visual learning, but represents cables as random B´ ezier curves without physically grounded deformation and restricts appearance (e.g., uni-formly white cables), limiting both mechanical realism and visual diversity. Similarly, [3] constructs synthetic cables as connected cylinders and uses collision modifiers to approx-imate interactions, which increases appearance variation but still relies on highly simplified mechanics. These procedural representations are typically not mesh-based, which prevents direct import of realistic cable CAD assets and reduces geo-metric fidelity and asset reusability. In addition, because the generated shapes are not governed by physically meaningful rod models, they may appear plausible in static renders yet fail to produce consistent dynamics under contact and self-interaction, conditions that matter for robot manipulation. On the physics side, common DLO simulators approx-imate deformable objects as chains of rigid capsules con-nected by ball joints [7]–[9]. While computationally con-venient and widely used in manipulation studies, rigid-link models oversimplify continuum mechanics (e.g., bending– twisting coupling and shear deformation), and often depends on extensive manual tuning of joint stiffness/damping pa-rameters rather than directly interpretable material proper-ties. An alternative is to model DLOs as volumetric soft bodies within general deformable-body frameworks, includ-ing finite-element and related methods [10]–[13]. These approaches can express richer material behavior, but are typically inefficient for representing long, slender objects: key rod mechanics arise only implicitly through 3D dis-cretization, computational cost can scale poorly with reso-lution, and results can be sensitive to meshing choices. In contrast, Cosserat rod theory provides a principled formula-tion specialized for DLOs by modeling a DLO as a one-dimensional continuum that explicitly captures stretching, shearing, bending, and twisting [14]–[16]. Its dynamics are governed by physically meaningful parameters (e.g., Young’s modulus and shear modulus), establishing a clearer link between simulation behavior and real material properties and enabling more accurate and interpretable modeling of DLOs [17]. However, existing Cosserat rod solvers are often used in isolation from photorealistic simulators and robotics middleware. For example, libraries such as PyElastica [18] provide physically realistic rod dynamics, but lack native support for complex interactions with free-form meshes and do not directly provide a high-fidelity rendering and robotics stack, limiting their applicability in robotic manipulation. These limitations become especially consequential for robot learning with DLOs. DLO tasks remain bottlenecked by data acquisition and sim-to-real discrepancies [9], [19]. Many systems still rely heavily on real-world demonstrations because collecting reliable simulated rollouts with realistic dynamics and contacts is difficult. For instance, [19] reports collecting 1,442 teleoperated demonstration trajectories for cable routing, underscoring the cost of scaling real-world data. Some works attempt to train DLO manipulation poli-cies purely in simulation, such as Iterative Residual Policy (IRP) [8], but their linked-capsule dynamics necessarily simplify elastic behavior, which can widen the sim-to-real gap and push algorithmic burden onto policy design rather than the simulator. Overall, there remains a gap in simulation infrastructure: a unified framework that jointly delivers phys-ically grounded rod dynamics, visually realistic rendering with reusable CAD assets, and seamless integration with robot learning pipelines. To address this gap, we propose DeformX , a co-simulation framework that couples a discrete Cosserat rod engine with Isaac Sim to achieve both physically and visually realistic DLO simulation for perception and robot learning. DeformX combines (i) physically interpretable Cosserat rod dynamics, (ii) realistic interactions with complex environments via mesh-based contact, and (iii) high-fidelity visualization and sensor simulation through CAD-compatible mesh skinning and Isaac Sim rendering. Our main contributions are:  

> •

DeformX Framework: A co-simulation system inte-grating a Cosserat rod physics engine with Isaac Sim to produce visually and physically realistic DLO simu-lations suitable for perception and robot learning.  

> •

Free-Form Mesh Contact: Support for DLO interac-tions with free-form meshes within the Cosserat rod engine, enabling realistic rod-object contact in cluttered environments.  

> •

Mesh-Skinned Visualization with CAD Support: 

We propose to utilize mesh skinning to map discrete Cosserat rod deformations onto meshes, allowing import of DLO CAD assets for high-fidelity visualization.  

> •

WireSeg-36k Dataset: A synthetic wire instance seg-mentation dataset containing diverse RGB images, depth maps, and ground-truth annotations. Fine-tuning SAM3 on our dataset yields a 10.2% improvement in mAP@75 on real-world experiments. II. NOTATIONS AND PRELIMINARY We model a deformable linear object (DLO) as a slender elastic rod using the Cosserat rod theory [20], [21], which captures all deformation modes of a 1D continuum including stretching, shearing, bending, and twisting. In the continuous representation (Fig. 2a), the rod is parameterized by arc-length s and time t, with centerline 

r(s, t ) ∈ R3 and an orthonormal material frame Q(s, t ) = Fig. 2: Cosserat rod modeling of DLOs. (a) Continuous Cosserat rod representation; (b) Discrete Cosserat rod repre-sentation; (c) Mesh skinned to the discrete Cosserat rod for realistic visualization. 

{d1(s, t ), d2(s, t ), d3(s, t )} ∈ SO(3) attached to each cross-section, where the directors d1, d2, d3 are the columns of Q.In the discrete representation (Fig. 2b), the centerline is sampled into vertices {ri(t)}ni=0 and orientations are stored as segment frames {Qj (t)}n−1 

> j=0

associated with edges ℓj =

rj+1 − rj , yielding a finite-dimensional state {ri, Qj } [21]– [23]. Time evolution is advanced numerically by discretizing 

t into steps tk = k∆t, so all state variables are updated from 

(rki , Qkj ) to (rk+1  

> i

, Qk+1  

> j

) at each timestep ∆t [18]. Cosserat rod dynamics are computed by conservation of linear and angular momentum along the rod. Material properties are incorporated through linear elastic constitu-tive laws, where Young’s modulus E and shear modulus 

G determine the rod stiffness in stretching/shearing and bending/twisting [14]. External interactions are incorporated through forcing and boundary-condition terms, including gravity, endpoint loads/torques, and contact with friction. III. METHODS 

A. Framework Overview 

We propose a co-simulation framework that tightly inte-grates a Cosserat rod engine with Isaac Sim to achieve physi-cally accurate and visually realistic simulation of DLOs. The core challenge lies in bridging two systems with fundamen-tally different functionalities and time scales. To address this, we design a multi-rate scheme that handles state updates, cross-engine interactions, and ensures stable bidirectional coupling between the Cosserat rod engine and Isaac Sim. The proposed framework enables simulation of DLOs that is 

Algorithm 1 Multi-rate co-simulation 

Require: Macro step ∆tIsaac , substeps N , with ∆tDLO =∆tIsaac /N  

> 1:

for each Isaac step k do  

> 2:

Get objects states from Isaac Sim (pose/velocity/acceleration)  

> 3:

for n = 1 to N do  

> 4:

Estimate motions of interacting objects  

> 5:

Integrate DLO dynamics for ∆tDLO 

(Cosserat rod + contact)  

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

Export DLO skeleton poses for rendering  

> 8:

Return reaction wrenches/impulses to Isaac Sim  

> 9:

Isaac Sim advances rigid-body + control for ∆tIsaac  

> 10:

end for 

both visually and physically realistic, facilitating downstream visual perception learning and robot learning tasks. An overview of our framework is illustrated in Fig. 3. 

B. Co-simulation Framework 

Division of Functionality: Our framework partitions func-tionalities between the Cosserat rod engine and Isaac Sim while maintaining tightly coupled interaction. The Cosserat rod engine computes all DLO dynamics and contacts be-tween DLOs and other objects, ensuring physically con-sistent deformation and contact responses, while Isaac Sim handles the rigid-body environment, including robot manip-ulators, fixtures, and other scene elements, providing rigid-body simulation, scene management, control interfaces, and photorealistic rendering. This division ensures that robot dy-namics and non-DLO interactions remain within Isaac Sim’s domain, while deformation physics and rod-driven contacts are governed by the specialized rod engine. As a result, our framework preserves high physical fidelity for deformable objects while leveraging the robustness and scalability of a mature rigid-body simulation platform. 

Multi-rate Co-simulation: A fundamental challenge in our co-simulation framework stems from the mismatch in time scales between the Cosserat rod engine and Isaac Sim modules. Stable DLO dynamics computation typically ne-cessitates finer time steps, ∆tDLO ∼ 10 −5 s, whereas Isaac Sim commonly advances rigid-body dynamics and control at coarser time steps, ∆tIsaac ∼ 10 −2 s. Consequently, the DLO states are updated multiple times within a single Isaac Sim step, during which no direct interaction between these two modules is available. To address this issue, we replicate the semi-implicit Euler integration used by Isaac Sim PhysX within the Cosserat rod engine. This approach enables us to estimate the motion of interacting rigid bodies (e.g., robot grippers or end-effectors) during fine-grained DLO updates, using only the states provided by Isaac Sim at coarse-grained time steps even when intermediate inputs from Isaac Sim are unavailable. Specifically, we represent the pose of an interacting rigid body as a rigid transform T ∈ SE (3) and parameterize Fig. 3: Overview of our co-simulation framework. Compared to existing simulators for vision (left) and RL (right), our framework jointly achieves visual realism, physical accuracy, DLO CAD support, and robot learning support with minimal parameter tuning by combining Isaac Sim and a dedicated Cosserat rod engine. incremental motion using a 6D minimal coordinate vector 

ξ ∈ R6, where ξ = [ x; θ] stacks translation x ∈ R3 and a 3D rotation coordinate θ ∈ R3 ∼= so (3) . The corresponding generalized velocity and acceleration are denoted by ˙ξ and 

¨ξ, respectively. At each time step ∆t, we first update the generalized velocity using semi-implicit Euler: 

˙ξn+1 = ˙ξn + ¨ξn∆t, (1) and then update the pose by composing the current transform with the incremental motion on SE(3) induced by the updated velocity: 

Tn+1 = Tn Exp( ˙ξn+1 ∆t), (2) where Exp( ·) denotes the exponential map that converts a 6D motion vector in R6 ∼= se (3) into an element of SE(3) .By replicating Isaac Sim’s integration scheme within the rod engine, we ensure consistent state evolution across sim-ulation modules during multi-rate updates, while allowing contact interactions to be evaluated against continuously updated rigid-body motion at the DLO time scale. These contact interactions must also be propagated back to Isaac Sim. To this end, we accumulate contact forces computed at the DLO time scale into integrated impulses or wrenches, which are then fed back to the corresponding rigid bodies in Isaac Sim at each coarse simulation step. This strategy en-ables stable and physically consistent bidirectional coupling across disparate time resolutions. 

Modular Interface: We have implemented the Cosserat rod engine as a Python module that integrates directly into Isaac Sim’s scripting environment, supporting both interactive UI-based workflows and headless execution. Users can construct scenes within Isaac Sim, after which geometry, poses, and simulation parameters are exported as initial conditions for the rod engine. The same interface is reused for large-scale dataset generation and robot learning, providing a unified pipeline from scene authoring to physics simulation and photorealistic rendering. 

C. Interaction with Free-Form Meshes 

For DLO simulation in robotic settings, interaction with surrounding objects is essential. However, current PyElastica and other Cosserat rod libraries [18], [24], [25] lack native support for contact with free-form meshes. Building on PyElastica’s penalty-based contact formulation, we compute the closest-point distance d between rod nodes {ri} and the mesh surface, and apply a repulsive normal contact force parameterized by stiffness k and dissipation ν. The Cosserat rod engine applies the resulting contact forces to the rod internally, and returns the equal-and-opposite reaction impulses/wrenches to the mesh, where the corresponding rigid body dynamics are resolved [24]. To improve computational efficiency, we prebuild aBounding Volume Hierarchy (BVH) over the mesh and employ AABB-based broad-phase pruning to reduce distance queries. To enhance robustness under larger time steps, we introduce a repulsion distance for watertight meshes to prevent deep penetration and keep the rod outside the surface. 

D. DLO Visualization in Isaac Sim 

For realistic visualization in Isaac Sim, we represent each DLO with a smooth tubular mesh that is skinned to the discrete Cosserat rod vertices. In this way, the motion of the Cosserat rod smoothly deforms the mesh. During simulation, the rod dynamics solver outputs the rod centerline and local orientation for each element, and at every Isaac Sim step we update the tubular mesh accordingly using these rod states. Mesh skinning is a technique widely used in animation and character modeling [26]. We incorporate this technique with a discretized Cosserat rod model to achieve high visual fidelity in Isaac Sim while maintaining full consis-tency with the underlying rod dynamics, as illustrated in (Fig. 2c). Moreover, because DLOs are visualized using skinned meshes, we can directly import CAD models of DLOs with pre-defined skins. This allows us to leverage a wide range of existing DLO CAD assets to create diverse and highly realistic DLO representations. IV. E XPERIMENT 

A. Validation of DLO Physics Simulation 

To validate physical fidelity, we perform a set of physics sanity checks and quantitative comparisons against observed Fig. 4: Sim2real comparison for DLOs. (a) We tie a trefoil knot on a wire, apply continuous twists to induce shape transitions, and qualitatively compare the representative con-figurations between simulation (top) and real experiments (bottom) [22]. (b) shows flexible rope (scarf) wrapping around a bunny with multi-point contact, sliding, and self-contact. DLO motion. Unlike Isaac Sim’s built-in DLO approxima-tions, the Cosserat rod model explicitly captures stretch-ing, shearing, bending, and twisting, enabling characteris-tic behaviors such as gravity-induced equilibria, curvature propagation, and torsion-bending coupling. We validate the physical fidelity of our simulation through two real-world experiments: 

(1) Knot deformation under twist: We design the first experiment to assess the simulator’s ability to reproduce realistic quasi-static deformations given real-world measure-ments. The physics-based parameters in our simulator are computed from factory-provided material specifications [27]. We tie the DLO into a simple (trefoil) knot and apply controlled twisting [22]. As shown in Fig. 4(a), the simulated knot undergoes the same qualitative shape transitions as those observed in real world. 

(2) Free-form contact modeling: We evaluate our imple-mentation of contact handling by wrapping a flexible rope (scarf) around a rigid bunny model. Starting from an initially draped configuration, we progressively pull and slide the scarf to induce multi-point, sliding contact and self-contact. Fig. 4 visualizes representative snapshots, showing that the simulated scarf conforms to the bunny geometry, preserves stable contact without interpenetration, and produces realistic winding and settling behavior under gravity and friction. For both experiments, our simulator yields physically consistent DLO behavior, supporting its use for realistic data generation and sim-to-real analysis. 

Fig. 5: Synthetic wire segmentation dataset generation pipeline. Randomized scenes are built from asset libraries. Wires are simulated with a Cosserat rod engine, and visual-ized as skinned meshes. RGB images, segmentation masks, and depth maps are generated and split by difficulty levels.                                

> Dataset Physics Realism Instance Label CAD Support Visually-grounded Scenes Num. Images HANDLOOM [2] ××××30k FASTDLO [4] ×✓××32k Fresnillo et al. [3] ✓××✓25k Zanella et al. [5] ××××28.5k ISCUTE [6] ×✓✓✓28k
> WireSeg-36k (Ours) ✓✓✓✓36k

TABLE I: Binary comparison between existing DLO datasets and our WireSeg-36k dataset. “Physics realism” indicates whether data generation uses physics-based simulation of DLO deformation (e.g., gravity, wind, and collisions). “In-stance label” indicates whether per-object instance masks are provided (trace-only supervision is counted as ×). “CAD support” indicates whether DLOs can be represented as free-form meshes (enabling direct CAD import). “Visually grounded scenes” indicates whether cables are rendered within realistic, image-based backgrounds rather than on plain or purely synthetic backdrops. 

B. Applications: Data Generation 

Overview: A key application of a visually and physically realistic DLO simulator is to generate high-quality synthetic data for training perception models without expensive man-ual annotation. Wire instance segmentation is fundamental to many tasks, yet large-scale annotated datasets are scarce due to the difficulty of labeling thin, deformable objects in cluttered scenes. With our co-simulation framework, we construct WireSeg-36k , a wire instance segmentation dataset designed with three principles: (1) high diversity in configu-rations, (2) a broad spectrum of difficulty levels for targeted training and evaluation, and (3) scenario-specific categories aligned with real-world use cases. A comparison between our dataset and existing datasets is shown in Table I. 

Data Generation Pipeline: The data generation pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 5. We assemble a library of base Model Hard (Syn) Medium (Syn) Easy (Syn) Total (Syn) Total (Real) F1@75 mAP@75 J F1@75 mAP@75 J F1@75 mAP@75 J F1@75 mAP@75 J F1@75 mAP@75 J                                              

> SAM3 (Base) 0.169 0.052 0.467 0.454 0.291 0.676 0.818 0.783 0.848 0.456 0.328 0.679 0.296 0.157 0.486 SAM3 + LoRA 0.191 0.068 0.518 0.517 0.374 0.738 0.855 0.837 0.879 0.501 0.389 0.728 0.314 0.173 0.496
> ∆(LoRA–Base) +13.4% +31.1% +10.9% +13.9% +28.8% +9.2% +4.5% +6.8% +3.7% +9.8% +18.4% +7.2% +6.1% +10.2% +2.1%

TABLE II: SAM3 with and without LoRA fine-tuning. Dataset-level F1@75, COCO mAP@75, and mean per-image Jaccard 

J on the Easy/Medium/Hard synthetic tiers, the full synthetic set, and a held-out real test set. Last row: % improvement from LoRA. 

Fig. 6: Representative images from three settings across Easy/Medium/Hard, with Hard ground-truth instance masks. scenes from publicly available 3D assets and then import the resulting geometry and materials into Isaac Sim. For each scene instance, we procedurally generate wire configurations (e.g., number of wires, length, radius, and initial shapes) and sample rigid objects/assets and their placements in Isaac Sim. During data generation, Isaac Sim simulates the robot and all non-wire rigid bodies, while our Cosserat Rod Engine solves the wire dynamics and computes wire-object interaction forces that are exchanged with Isaac Sim through the coupling interface. The simulated wire state is streamed to Isaac Sim for skeleton-driven rendering, together with the static scene geometry and asset materials. We further randomize camera viewpoints, lighting conditions, and scene textures to increase visual diversity and improve robustness to domain shifts. Sample images from our dataset is shown in Fig. 6. 

Categories: We organize the dataset into three scenario categories: (1) wire-on-plane , a canonical tabletop setup; (2) 

flying wires , focusing on gravity-driven dangling dynamics; and (3) data center , featuring cables arranged within data-center racks, using photorealistic assets from NVIDIA Omni-verse [28]. In total, we collect 36,000 rendered images from 720 independent simulation runs. 

Annotations, Depth, and Difficulty: We provide per-wire instance masks for multi-wire segmentation, along with per-pixel depth maps to support high-resolution 3D perception beyond typical RGB-D limitations on thin cables [29], [30]. We also stratify the dataset into easy/medium/hard splits by thresholding the per-image Jaccard score J (mask IoU) achieved by the off-the-shelf SAM3 baseline on the gener-ated images (Fig. 6). Images with J < 0.6 are labeled hard, those with J ≥ 0.8 easy, and all others medium. 

Complementary Real-World Test Set: To support real-world evaluation, we additionally create a separate test set of 300 in-the-wild images with manually annotated ground truth segmentations. Images are collected across diverse backgrounds, lighting conditions, and cable types to reflect real deployment variation. 

Model Fine-tuning: To demonstrate that our dataset can directly support training wire instance segmentation mod-els, we perform a simple LoRA fine-tuning experiment on SAM3, using 1024 × 1024 inputs with 288 × 288 output masks. We adapt the vision encoder and mask decoder by inserting lightweight LoRA adapters into the attention projections ( q proj , k proj , v proj ; rank 16, α = 32 ,dropout 0.05), while keeping all other components frozen to maintain parameter efficiency and training stability. We train for 5 epochs on our synthetic wire dataset using a learning rate of 1 × 10 −5 and an effective batch size of 16. As a strong foundation-model baseline, we also evaluate off-the-shelf SAM3 on our dataset in text-prompt mode using the prompt ‘‘cable’’ . We report dataset-level F1@75 (instance F1 with one-to-one matching at IoU ≥ 0.75 ) and mAP@75 (COCO-style AP at IoU = 0 .75 ). Across both the synthetic benchmark and our held-out real-world test set, LoRA fine-tuning improves performance over the off-the-shelf baseline (Table II). 

C. Applications: Robot Learning 

Motivation: Dynamic rope swinging amplifies modeling errors: small inaccuracies in bending/torsion and contact can cause large deviations in the rope-tip trajectory, leading to a pronounced sim-to-real gap in fast “whipping” regimes. We therefore use a planar hit-target rope-swinging benchmark inspired by Chi et al. [8] as a stress test to quantify whether improved DLO physics yields more reliable sim-to-real policy transfer. Fig. 7: (a) Robot-driven rope experiment with one end anchored to the ground and the other attached to the robot end-effector, which executes a sinusoidal trajectory; overlays are shown with time stamps. (b) Trajectory error over time, as defined in Eq. 5. 

Task and Metric: A UR5e robotic arm swings a rope so that its tip passes as close as possible to a fixed target point. Following [8], we evaluate performance using the minimum tip-to-goal distance over a rollout, 

dmin = min   

> t∈[0 ,T ]

∥ptip (t) − pgoal ∥2 . (3) We parameterize the robot motion with a low-dimensional joint-space action 

at = (∆ J1, ∆J2, ∆J3), (4) where ∆J1–∆J3 denote bounded per-step increments for the three actuated UR5e joints. These increments are accumu-lated into joint position targets at each control step. 

Planar Motion Constraint: We constrain the robot motion to be planar, and define the target location in-plane. This restriction is sufficient for the hit-target task, since out-of-plane targets can be reached by a trivial rotation of the robot base; we therefore fix the base rotation and focus on planar whipping dynamics. 

Parameter Settings of Simulated Ropes: The choice of rope parameters can significantly affect experimental out-comes. To ensure a fair comparison between DeformX and the Isaac Sim linked-capsule baseline, we calibrate the rope parameters using a robot-driven rope motion experiment. Specifically, we attach a 2 m rope to a UR5e robot arm and command a sinusoidal end-effector trajectory (1.2 Hz frequency and 0.2 m amplitude), while tracking the rope in 3D using a motion-capture system. The identical boundary motion is then replayed in simulation. We tune the rope parameters so that the trajectory error between simulated and real rope configurations is minimized for both simulators: 

Error (t) = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

xsim  

> i

(t) − xreal  

> i

(t) 2 , (5) where N is the number of motion-capture markers placed along the rope (here N = 20 ). The resulting trajectory errors are shown in Fig. 7. The calibrated rope parameters produce small and comparable errors for both simulators. These parameters are subsequently used for RL training. 

Fig. 8: Goal-conditioned dynamic manipulation of a DLO. Our RL policy reaches the goal. Left: simulation rollout. Right: real-world rollout. The goal location is marked by a star. Colored curves visualize the DLO configuration over time during a rollout.                                 

> Target Point Method Sim dmin Real ( n=10 )dmin
> (0, 200, 230) Baseline 4.9 15 .1±6.1
> DeformX (Ours) 4.2 6.6 ±4.7
> (0, 200, 150) Baseline 4.4 25 .9±8.9
> DeformX (Ours) 1.4 7.3 ±1.2
> (0, 170, 50) Baseline 4.3 30 .4±14 .3
> DeformX (Ours) 3.3 5.8 ±3.2

TABLE III: Hit-target task results. dmin (unit: cm) is defined in Eq. (3) and reported in centimeters. Real-world results are computed over n=10 repeated executions for the same goal; we report mean and standard deviation. 

Controlled Comparison and Training: To isolate the effect of the DLO simulator, we keep the PPO algorithm, obser-vations/actions, reward, training budget, and all non-DLO task components fixed, and vary only the DLO backend: (i) DeformX and (ii) an Isaac Sim linked-capsule baseline. PPO is trained with identical rollout, parallelization, and state/goal inputs for both backends. The policy controls a planar 3-DoF subset of UR5e joints via bounded incremental position commands, with the same action space and command limits for both backends. 

Sim-to-real Evaluation: We deploy the learned open-loop motion on a real UR5e and track the rope tip using an Opti-Track system. For a fixed goal, we repeat the same execution 

n=10 times and report the mean and standard deviation of 

dmin . Representative rollouts are shown in Fig. 8, and results are summarized in Table III. While both simulators obtain low in-simulation errors, only DeformX transfers reliably to the real robot. Across all three targets, DeformX reduces the real-world minimum tip-to-goal distance from 15.1/25.9/30.4 cm to 6.6/7.3/5.8 cm, respectively. Since both simulators are calibrated on the same robot-driven rope experiment and all PPO settings are kept fixed, this result indicates that physically accurate modeling of bending, torsion, and contact is critical for sim-to-real transfer in dynamic rope swinging. V. C ONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION 

We introduced DeformX , a co-simulation framework that integrates a dedicated Cosserat rod engine with NVIDIA Isaac Sim to enable DLO simulation that is both physically faithful and visually realistic, while remaining compatible with scalable data generation and robot learning. Our frame-work supports contact interactions with free-form meshes, multi-rate coupling with rigid-body dynamics, and CAD-quality visualization through mesh skinning. Leveraging De-formX , we further constructed WireSeg-36k , a wire instance segmentation dataset that provides RGB images, depth maps, and ground-truth annotations. Despite these advantages, there are several limitations. First, our current Cosserat rod engine is implemented entirely on the CPU, which limits computational efficiency and scalability. Second, in the present multi-rate co-simulation scheme, the influence of the DLO on contacting rigid bodies is approximated by integrating contact forces into a single impulse or wrench within each Isaac Sim time step. This ap-proximation may introduce inaccuracies in the bidirectional coupling between deformable and rigid objects. Additionally, recent advances in stable Cosserat rod formulations [25] propose a split position-rotation optimization scheme with a closed-form Gauss-Seidel quasi-static orientation update, achieving high accuracy under large stiffness parameters while maintaining stability with larger time steps. Such meth-ods also support GPU parallelization. Incorporating these techniques would not only improve computational efficiency but also potentially eliminate the time-scale discrepancy between Isaac Sim and the rod engine. Future work will therefore focus on upgrading DeformX to adopt a stable Cosserat rod formulation, aiming to fundamen-tally resolve time-scale discrepancy issue while leveraging GPU acceleration for improved performance and scalability. VI. A CKNOWLEDGMENT 

Generative AI tools were used for language refinement and code assistance. All content was reviewed, validated, and integrated by the authors. The authors take full responsibility for the originality and correctness of this work. REFERENCES [1] J. Sanchez, J.-A. Corrales, B.-C. Bouzgarrou, and Y. Mezouar, “Robotic manipulation and sensing of deformable objects in domestic and industrial applications: a survey,” The International Journal of Robotics Research , vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 688–716, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1177/0278364918779698 [2] V. Viswanath, K. Shivakumar, M. Parulekar, J. Ajmera, J. Kerr, J. Ichnowski, R. Cheng, T. Kollar, and K. Goldberg, “Handloom: Learned tracing of one-dimensional objects for inspection and manipulation,” in Proceedings of The 7th Conference on Robot Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, J. Tan, M. Toussaint, and K. Darvish, Eds., vol. 229. PMLR, 06–09 Nov 2023, pp. 341–357. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/ v229/viswanath23a.html [3] P. MalvidoFresnillo, W. M. Mohammed, S. Vasudevan, J. A. PerezGarcia, and J. L. MartinezLastra, “Generation of realistic synthetic cable images to train deep learning segmentation models,” 

Machine Vision and Applications , vol. 35, no. 4, p. 84, Jun 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s00138-024-01562-y [4] A. Caporali, K. Galassi, R. Zanella, and G. Palli, “Fastdlo: Fast deformable linear objects instance segmentation,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 9075–9082, 2022. [5] R. Zanella, A. Caporali, K. Tadaka, D. D. Gregorio, and G. Palli, “Auto-generated wires dataset for semantic segmentation with domain-independence,” 2021 International Conference on Computer, Control and Robotics (ICCCR) , pp. 292–298, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:231915434 [6] S. Kozlovsky, O. Joglekar, and D. D. Castro, “Iscute: Instance segmentation of cables using text embedding,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.11996 [7] S. Zhaole, J. Zhu, and R. B. Fisher, “Dexdlo: Learning goal-conditioned dexterous policy for dynamic manipulation of deformable linear objects,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2024, pp. 16 009–16 015. [8] C. Chi, B. Burchfiel, E. Cousineau, S. Feng, and S. Song, “Iterative residual policy: for goal-conditioned dynamic manipulation of deformable objects,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/ abs/2203.00663 [9] V. Lim, H. Huang, L. Y. Chen, J. Wang, J. Ichnowski, D. Seita, M. Laskey, and K. Goldberg, “Real2sim2real: Self-supervised learning of physical single-step dynamic actions for planar robot casting,” in 

2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,2022, pp. 8282–8289. [10] P. Kaufmann, S. Martin, M. Botsch, and M. Gross, “Flexible sim-ulation of deformable models using discontinuous galerkin fem,” 

Graphical Models , vol. 71, no. 4, pp. 153–167, 2009. [11] Q. Wang, H. Fang, N. Li, D. C. Weggel, and G. Wen, “An efficient fe model of slender members for crash analysis of cable barriers,” 

Engineering structures , vol. 52, pp. 240–256, 2013. [12] N. Lv, J. Liu, X. Ding, J. Liu, H. Lin, and J. Ma, “Physically based real-time interactive assembly simulation of cable harness,” Journal of Manufacturing Systems , vol. 43, pp. 385–399, 2017. [13] P. P. Valentini and E. Pennestr` ı, “Modeling elastic beams using dynamic splines,” Multibody system dynamics , vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 271– 284, 2011. [14] D. Cao and R. W. Tucker, “Nonlinear dynamics of elastic rods using the cosserat theory: Modelling and simulation,” International Journal of Solids and Structures , vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 460–477, 2008. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0020768307003253 [15] J. Linn and K. Dreßler, “Discrete cosserat rod models based on the difference geometry of framed curves for interactive simulation of flexible cables,” in Math for the Digital Factory . Springer, 2017, pp. 289–319. [16] F. Renda, F. Boyer, J. Dias, and L. Seneviratne, “Discrete cosserat approach for multisection soft manipulator dynamics,” IEEE Transac-tions on Robotics , vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 1518–1533, 2018. [17] N. Lv, J. Liu, H. Xia, J. Ma, and X. Yang, “A review of techniques for modeling flexible cables,” Computer-Aided Design , vol. 122, p. 102826, 2020. [Online]. Available: https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0010448520300191 [18] N. Naughton, J. Sun, A. Tekinalp, T. Parthasarathy, G. Chowdhary, and M. Gazzola, “Elastica: A compliant mechanics environment for soft robotic control,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 3389–3396, 2021. [19] J. Luo, C. Xu, X. Geng, G. Feng, K. Fang, L. Tan, S. Schaal, and S. Levine, “Multistage cable routing through hierarchical imitation learning,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics , vol. 40, pp. 1476–1491, 2024. [20] M. Renardy, “Nonlinear problems of elasticity (stuart s. antman),” 

SIAM Review , vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 637–637, 1995. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1137/1037152 [21] M. Gazzola, L. H. Dudte, A. G. McCormick, and L. Mahadevan, “Forward and inverse problems in the mechanics of soft filaments,” 

Royal Society Open Science , vol. 5, no. 6, p. 171628, 06 2018. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1098/rsos.171628 [22] M. Bergou, M. Wardetzky, S. Robinson, B. Audoly, and E. Grinspun, “Discrete elastic rods,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2008 Papers , ser. SIGGRAPH ’08. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2008. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/1399504.1360662 [23] Gazzola Lab, “Elastica: Cosserat rods,” Website, developed and maintained by the Gazzola Lab at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. [Online]. Available: https://www.cosseratrods.org/ [24] A. Tekinalp, S. H. Kim, Y. Bhosale, T. Parthasarathy, N. Naughton, A. Albazroun, R. Joon, S. Cui, I. Nasiriziba, M. St¨ olzle, C.-H. C. Shih, and M. Gazzola, “Gazzolalab/pyelastica,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7658871 [25] J. Hsu, T. Wang, K. Wu, and C. Yuksel, “Stable cosserat rods,” in Proceedings of the Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Conference Papers ,ser. SIGGRAPH Conference Papers ’25. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3721238.3730618 [26] D. L. James and C. D. Twigg, “Skinning mesh animations,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) , vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 399–407, 2005. [27] COEX 3D, “White coexflex 60a tpu,” accessed: 2026-03-05. [Online]. Available: https://coex3d.com/products/white-coexflex-60a-tpu [28] NVIDIA Corporation, “Data center assets pack,” Online documentation, NVIDIA Omniverse, accessed: 2026-03-06. [Online]. Available: https://docs.omniverse.nvidia.com/usd/latest/ usd content samples/downloadable packs.html [29] J. Xiang, H. Dinkel, H. Zhao, N. Gao, B. Coltin, T. Smith, and T. Bretl, “Trackdlo: Tracking deformable linear objects under occlusion with motion coherence,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 6179–6186, 2023. [30] H. Lin, S. Chen, J. Liew, D. Y. Chen, Z. Li, G. Shi, J. Feng, and B. Kang, “Depth anything 3: Recovering the visual space from any views,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.10647 VII. A PPENDIX 

This appendix details the WireSeg-36k dataset, the per-scene behaviour of the SAM3 baseline, RL formulation of the planar hit-target rope-swinging task, and a qualitative dynamic-manipulation demonstration (Hit Apple Task). 

A. Dataset Composition WireSeg-36k spans three scenario categories — wire-on-plane, flying wires, and data center — generated from 720 

independent simulation runs. The first two categories are further split by wire count ( {2, 4, 8}) to vary clutter and inter-wire occlusion; Table IV summarises the per-scene composition. 

Fig. 9: All-data distribution of the per-image Jaccard score with the hard/medium/easy bands (thresholds 0.6 and 0.8). 

Fig. 10: Distribution of the per-image Jaccard score J over the published WireSeg-36k (36 ,000 images), using the off-the-shelf SAM3 baseline with the ‘‘cable’’ prompt. Thresholding J at 0.6 and 0.8 stratifies the dataset into hard 

(J < 0.6): 9,016 images ( 25 .0% ), medium (0.6 ≤ J < 0.8): 

15 ,393 (42 .8% ), and easy (J ≥ 0.8): 11 ,591 (32 .2% ). 

B. Difficulty and Per-Scene Segmentation Quality 

We grade per-image difficulty with the off-the-shelf SAM3 baseline (text prompt ‘‘cable’’ ) using the Jaccard index (intersection-over-union) between predicted and ground-truth                                                

> Category Scene #W #Img Mean JF1@75 mAP@75
> Wire-on-plane
> drop n2 25,000 0.760 0.621 0.584
> drop n4 45,000 0.739 0.609 0.550
> drop n8 85,000 0.726 0.594 0.546 Flying wires
> hang n2 25,000 0.788 0.612 0.621
> hang n4 45,000 0.716 0.508 0.472
> hang n8 85,000 0.625 0.390 0.320 Data center datacenter 4,8,16 6,000 0.602 0.368 0.340
> All data 36,000 0.705 0.524 0.486

TABLE IV: Status of WireSeg-36k : per-scene composition and per-image Jaccard J, F1@75, and mAP@75 of the off-the-shelf SAM3 baseline (prompt ‘‘cable’’ ); #W is the number of wire in that scene simulation. wire masks. Let M be a ground-truth instance mask and ˆM apredicted instance mask, each represented as the set of image pixels belonging to that instance. Their Jaccard index is 

J( ˆM , M ) = | ˆM ∩ M || ˆM ∪ M | ∈ [0 , 1] , (6) where ∩ and ∪ are the per-pixel intersection and union and 

|·| counts pixels, so J = 1 denotes a perfect overlap and 

J = 0 disjoint masks. Fig. 9 shows the all-data distribution of J with the easy/medium/hard bands, and Fig. 10 with Table IV break it down by scene. Two effects dominate: segmentation quality falls monotonically with wire count in both categories, and flying wires degrade faster than wire-on-plane at high density, as freely hanging cables overlap more in depth. The data-center scenes are hardest overall, limited by dense rack cabling and complex backgrounds rather than by simulation fidelity. 

Prompt AP F1@75 J zero-J pred/GT cable 0.352 0.524 0.705 25 1.94 wire 0.328 0.508 0.694 61 1.89 cord 0.310 0.478 0.683 141 1.79 colorful cable 0.309 0.466 0.682 127 1.47 foreground * 0.307 0.478 0.691 3 1.32 colorful cords 0.303 0.453 0.693 248 1.41 long cylinder 0.271 0.439 0.680 3441 1.08 

TABLE V: Prompt sweep for the off-the-shelf SAM3 base-line over WireSeg-36k (36 ,000 images); only the prompt is varied. AP is COCO mAP over IoU 0.50 –0.95 , pooled dataset-wide. F1@75 (per-image F1 at IoU 0.75 ) and J (per-image mean Jaccard) are computed per image and averaged. zero-J counts images with J = 0 (no prediction or predicted masks but match no true wires); pred/GT is total number of predictions over total GT instances ( 1.0 ideal, > 1 over-detection). Higher is better except zero-J and pred/GT; Best per column in bold ; * the foreground row is short for the prompt ‘‘cables in the foreground’’ .Fig. 11: Hit-apple demonstration: temporal montage of two trials (rows) as a UR5e swings a rope through Initial →

Approach → Swing → Contact → Finish to knock an apple off a person’s head, actuating only joints 2, 3, and 4. 

C. Prompt Sensitivity of the SAM3 Baseline 

The main paper queries SAM3 with the single-token prompt ‘‘cable’’ ; Table V quantifies how much this choice matters. Using the same SAM3 off-the-shelf model (no fine-tuning), we sweep seven prompts and evaluate over all 36 ,000 images. ‘‘cable’’ is the clear winner on almost every quality metric, with the more descriptive prompts trailing behind. The diagnostics expose a precision– recall trade-off: ‘‘cable’’ fires most aggressively — pred/GT 1.94 , roughly twice as many masks as the ground truth — yet almost never fails outright ( 25 zero-J im-ages), whereas geometric or qualified prompts suppress over-detection at a steep recall cost. ‘‘long cylinder’’ 

nearly calibrates the instance count (pred/GT 1.08 ) but predicts no overlapping or no mask on 3,441 images, and even its lenient AP 50 collapses to 0.379 ; ‘‘cable in the foreground’’ fails on only three images yet still trails ‘‘cable’’ on AP. A fixed ‘‘cable’’ prompt is therefore a robust default, and prompt phrasing is not the main accuracy bottleneck. 

D. Reinforcement Learning Formulation 

We use PPO to demonstrate that DeformX can support policy learning for dynamic DLO manipulation. The task is inspired by the hit-target benchmark of Chi et al. [8], while the policy formulation and training procedure are implemented independently. 

a) Policy inputs and outputs.: For the hit-target rope-swinging task, we actuate UR5e joints 1, 2, and 3 and denote the active-joint set by A = {1, 2, 3}. At each control step, the policy observes the positions and velocities of the active robot joints, the rope-tip position and velocity, the end-effector position, and the target position: 

st =

h

qA 

> t

, ˙qA 

> t

, ptip  

> t

, ˙ptip  

> t

, pee  

> t

, ptar i

. (7) This gives an 18-dimensional observation. The policy outputs three normalized actions, which are scaled according to the joint-velocity limits and accumulated as incremental joint-position commands. The resulting targets are clipped to the valid joint ranges. During training, the policy operates in closed loop and receives an updated robot and rope state at every control step. 

b) Reward and termination.: Let dt be the rope-tip distance to the target in the motion plane. We organize the reward into five components: 

rt = rnear  

> t

+ rprogress  

> t

+ rswing  

> t

+ rbonus  

> t

− rregularization  

> t

. (8) The proximity term rewards a small tip-to-target distance, while the progress term rewards reductions in both the current distance and the closest distance reached during the episode. The swing term encourages the rope tip to move toward the target and promotes motion of the primary swing-driving joint. Additional bonuses are given when the tip crosses a set of distance thresholds and when the target is reached. We regularize the policy using penalties on action magnitude, abrupt action changes, and episode duration. The reward is clipped to avoid unusually large updates. An episode terminates when the target is reached, the time limit is exceeded, or the rope tip leaves the valid workspace. 

c) Real-world execution.: The trained policy is first used to generate successful joint-command trajectories in simulation. Because the current physical setup does not provide online estimates of the rope-tip state, these trajecto-ries are replayed open loop on the UR5e. The real-world experiment therefore evaluates whether dynamic motions discovered in DeformX transfer to the physical system, rather than evaluating closed-loop visual feedback control. 

E. Dynamic Striking Demonstration 

Beyond the quantitative hit-target benchmark, we include a qualitative demonstration of dynamic rope manipulation: a UR5e swings a rope to knock an apple off a person’s head (Fig. 11). The policy actuates only the second, third, and fifth joints of the arm, whipping the rope’s free end onto the target with a horizontal velocity, and shows that the pipeline used for the hit-target task extends to dynamic striking not on the vertical plane. Both tasks shape a reward on the rope’s free end. The main-paper hit-target task rewards driving the tip toward the goal, with the return dominated by the minimum tip-to-goal distance dmin of Eq. 3. The striking demonstration instead rewards reaching the target with large horizontal tip velocity, encouraging a forceful, whip-like impact rather than a gentle touch.