Nonparametric Variance-Penalized Actor-Critic:
Statistical Inference for Risk-Sensitive Reinforcement Learning
Saunak Kumar Panda∗, Tong Li†, Yisha Xiang†, and Ruiqi Liu‡
September 15, 2026
Abstract
Variance penalization is a principled approach to risk-sensitive reinforcement learning (RL)
that explicitly trades expected return for policy stability.
Existing methods require a ded-
icated second critic to estimate return variance online, adding architectural complexity and
compounding estimation error during learning. We propose a nonparametric variance-penalized
actor-critic (VPAC) framework that replaces the variance critic with statistically grounded on-
line estimators based on bootstrapping and random scaling, techniques drawn from the statis-
tical inference literature for stochastic approximation. These estimators require no auxiliary
network, maintain a single-critic architecture, and produce variance penalties that are bounded
by construction, enabling clean convergence analysis.
We establish almost-sure convergence
for both a variance-penalized Q-learning algorithm and a two-timescale actor-critic variant via
the ordinary differential equation (ODE) method, requiring only that variance estimates re-
main bounded rather than consistent. Empirically, we evaluate across discrete and continuous
stochastic environments, demonstrating that the proposed methods match or exceed the variance
reduction achieved by the existing dual-critic VPAC baseline [1] while eliminating the overhead
of a second critic. We further validate on a high-temperature superconductor (HTS) manufac-
turing case study, where VPAC-RS (Random Scaling) achieves a 74% reduction in steady-state
critical current variability and a 63% reduction in episode return standard deviation, translating
directly to improved yield consistency. Our results establish nonparametric statistical inference
as a practical and theoretically sound alternative to auxiliary critics for risk-sensitive RL.
Keywords: Risk-sensitive reinforcement learning, variance penalization, nonparametric estima-
tion, actor-critic, stochastic approximation, manufacturing control.
1
Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) has emerged as a powerful framework for sequential decision-making,
with demonstrated successes spanning game-playing, robotics, and autonomous systems [2, 3, 4].
The dominant objective in nearly all of this work is the maximization of expected cumulative reward,
an objective that is mathematically convenient via Bellman optimality equations and empirically
effective in domains where occasional large losses are tolerable. A growing class of high-stakes
∗Saunak Kumar Panda is with the Human-Centered AI Institute, C.T. Bauer College of Business, University of
Houston, Houston, TX 77204 USA.
†Tong Li and Yisha Xiang are with the Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Houston,
Houston, TX 77204 USA.
‡Ruiqi Liu is with the Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 79409
USA.
1
arXiv:2609.14327v1  [cs.LG]  13 Sep 2026


applications, however, cannot tolerate unpredictable outcomes. In industrial manufacturing, a pol-
icy that achieves high average product quality but occasionally drives the process into unstable
operating regions causes equipment damage, material waste, or off-specification product. Similar
constraints arise in financial portfolio management [5], autonomous driving [6], clinical decision
support [7], and energy grid operation [8]: consistency of outcome is as valuable as average perfor-
mance, and a risk-sensitive learner is therefore required.
Among the risk criteria studied in the RL literature, the mean-variance objective
Jvar(π) = E[Gπ] −β · Var(Gπ),
β > 0,
(1)
holds a particularly prominent position. It is transparent: the practitioner directly controls the
risk-return tradeoff via the scalar β; it is interpretable as a sequential generalization of Markowitz’s
classical portfolio theory [9]; and it is tractable in the sense that it does not require modeling the
entire return distribution. Variance-penalized formulations have consequently been a workhorse of
risk-sensitive RL since the foundational work of Sobel [10] and White [11], and continue to attract
attention in modern actor-critic settings [12, 13, 1, 14].
Despite its appeal, variance penalization carries a practical cost that is rarely discussed explic-
itly. Unlike expected returns, which satisfy a recursive Bellman equation and can be estimated
eﬀiciently by temporal-difference (TD) methods, return variance does not admit a simple recursive
formulation without explicit second-moment tracking or state augmentation [10, 15]. The dominant
strategy in prior work is to introduce a dedicated variance critic that learns the second moment of
returns in parallel with the primary value function [1, 13, 16, 12]. This dual-critic design carries
three practical costs. First, the number of learned function approximators doubles, with a corre-
sponding increase in memory, computation, and hyperparameters. Second, variance-critic errors
propagate into the policy update; in high-noise environments, an inaccurate estimate can mislead
the actor and produce oscillations or overly conservative behaviour. Third, theoretical analyses of
dual-critic methods typically assume that the variance critic is consistent, a strong condition that
is rarely verifiable in practice under function approximation, and that creates a gap between theory
and deployment.
A parallel body of work on statistical inference for stochastic approximation [17, 18, 19, 20,
21] has developed nonparametric tools for constructing confidence intervals around TD iterates.
Two techniques have proved particularly effective: random scaling [18, 20], which constructs self-
normalized variance estimates from the trajectory of iterates themselves; and online bootstrap-
ping [19], which maintains a small ensemble of perturbed iterates whose spread provides a non-
parametric variance estimate. Both are computationally inexpensive, require no auxiliary network,
and carry statistical validity guarantees derived from functional central limit theorems for the TD
learning setting. We identify a key reuse opportunity: the same empirical variance estimates can be
repurposed as a risk-sensitivity signal, plugged directly into (1) as an empirical proxy for Var(Gπ).
The result is an algorithm that is risk-sensitive by design and architecturally simple, requiring only
that the variance estimate be bounded rather than consistent with the true variance, a strictly
weaker condition than that assumed by dual-critic methods.
This paper makes four contributions. We introduce a unified nonparametric variance-penalized
RL framework instantiated as a tabular Q-learning algorithm and a two-timescale actor-critic, both
supplied by online bootstrapping (VPAC-BS) or random scaling (VPAC-RS) instead of a learned
variance critic. We establish almost-sure convergence of both variants via the ODE method of
Borkar [22], requiring only that the variance penalty remain bounded: this eliminates the third
timescale and the consistency assumption required by [1] and replaces them with a boundedness
condition enforced algorithmically by variance clipping. We demonstrate empirically across discrete
2


and continuous stochastic environments that the proposed methods match or exceed the variance
reduction of the dual-critic VPAC baseline (up to 83% reduction in steady-state return variance)
while maintaining a single-critic architecture. We further validate on a high-temperature supercon-
ductor (HTS) manufacturing case study, where VPAC-RS achieves a 74% reduction in steady-state
critical current variability and a 63% reduction in episode return standard deviation, with the
risk-return tradeoff characterized explicitly by a Pareto analysis across penalty coeﬀicients.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II reviews related work on
risk-sensitive RL, adaptive dynamic programming, distributional RL, and statistical inference for
stochastic approximation. Section III introduces the notation and Markov decision process frame-
work. Section IV presents the proposed variance-penalized framework and associated algorithms.
Section V establishes the convergence properties of the proposed methods. Section VI reports ex-
perimental results on the Puddle World benchmarks, and Section VII presents a high-temperature
superconducting (HTS) manufacturing case study. Finally, Section VIII concludes the paper and
discusses limitations, extensions to deep RL, and directions for future research.
2
Related Work
We review four threads of literature that intersect at the contribution of this paper: risk-sensitive RL
with variance criteria; adaptive dynamic programming and actor-critic methods with convergence
guarantees; distributional RL as an alternative paradigm for outcome variability; and statistical
inference for stochastic approximation.
2.1
Risk-Sensitive Reinforcement Learning
Risk-sensitive RL encompasses a broad class of methods that go beyond expected return by explic-
itly accounting for outcome variability [23, 24]. Utility-based criteria form one family: Howard and
Matheson [25] pioneered the use of exponential utility functions to encode risk preferences in MDPs,
producing what is now called the risk-sensitive Bellman equation, and Borkar [26, 27] subsequently
established convergence of Q-learning under exponential utility with applications in financial and
inventory control. While theoretically elegant, exponential utilities have practical limitations: the
risk parameter carries no direct interpretation in terms of return variance, and the value function
can grow exponentially with the risk parameter, causing numerical diﬀiculties in moderate-scale
problems [23]. A second family, coherent risk measures such as Conditional Value-at-Risk (CVaR)
and Value-at-Risk (VaR), has gained popularity for its interpretability as a tail-risk measure; Chow
et al. [28] developed a unified framework for CVaR-optimal MDPs, Tamar et al. [29] proposed gra-
dient methods for CVaR optimization in continuous control, and subsequent work extended these
ideas to deep RL via distributional value functions [30, 31]. CVaR and variance control address
related but distinct concerns: CVaR focuses on tail behavior, whereas variance control suppresses
overall spread, and for manufacturing and process control applications in which practitioners want
a single, interpretable risk parameter, the mean-variance objective remains preferred because of its
direct connection to the engineering notion of process variability.
The mean-variance approach that this paper builds on dates to Sobel [10] and White [11], who
introduced indirect variance estimation via second-moment tracking in policy evaluation. Tamar
et al. [12, 32] developed actor-only and actor-critic methods that estimate value variance along-
side returns, establishing the two-timescale framework that underlies most subsequent variance-
penalized algorithms, and Prashanth and Ghavamzadeh [16, 13] extended this work with asymp-
totic convergence guarantees for the discounted setting. Bisi et al. [33] introduced a per-step reward
variance formulation that admits a Bellman-like recursion, trading generality for tractability. The
3


Variance-Penalized Actor-Critic (VPAC) of Jain et al. [1] introduced a direct variance estimator
updated incrementally via TD methods, eliminating second-moment tracking and providing local
convergence guarantees; this is the closest prior work to our approach. The Variance-Constrained
Actor-Critic (VCAC) [14] casts variance control as a Lagrangian saddle-point problem and proves
convergence for overparameterized neural networks. Sherstan et al. [15] compared direct and in-
direct variance estimators for general value functions, motivated by auxiliary task learning, and
Sangadi et al. [34] recently provided finite-sample bounds for mean-variance actor-critic using si-
multaneous perturbation stochastic approximation (SPSA), pushing the theoretical frontier toward
non-asymptotic guarantees. All of these methods introduce additional learned components, a vari-
ance critic, Lagrange multiplier dynamics, or a perturbation-based estimator with its own hyper-
parameters, to estimate the variance signal. Our contribution is to show that this architectural
overhead is avoidable when nonparametric statistical estimators are used.
2.2
Adaptive Dynamic Programming and Actor-Critic Convergence
The convergence analysis of actor-critic algorithms via stochastic approximation has been a central
theme in the adaptive dynamic programming (ADP) community [35, 36, 37], with Borkar’s two-
timescale framework [22] providing the foundational machinery for almost-sure convergence proofs.
Al-Dabooni and Wunsch [38] extended this framework to heuristic dynamic programming with
eligibility traces, establishing uniformly-ultimately-bounded stability under neural network function
approximation, a result directly relevant to our setting because it shows that bounded perturbations
of the Bellman operator, as introduced by our clipped variance estimator, do not destroy stability.
Finite-sample analyses have emerged more recently [39, 40], but typically require i.i.d. sampling or
architectural assumptions not satisfied under the empirical variance estimation setting we consider;
our work uses the asymptotic ODE framework, suﬀicient to establish almost-sure convergence, and
we discuss the extension to finite-sample rates as an open direction in Section 8.
2.3
Distributional RL and Statistical Inference for SA
A complementary approach to handling return variability is distributional RL, which models the
full distribution of returns rather than just its first moment. Bellemare et al. [41] introduced the
C51 algorithm and the distributional Bellman operator, and subsequent advances include quan-
tile regression-based methods (QR-DQN) [30] and implicit quantile networks (IQN) [31], which
derive risk measures such as CVaR from the learned distribution at deployment time. Distribu-
tional methods aim to represent the return distribution accurately, with variance and tail behavior
emerging as derived quantities, whereas variance-penalized methods directly shape the policy to re-
duce return variance without a full distributional representation; for a single risk-averse policy with
a transparent risk parameter, the variance-penalized approach is typically more sample-eﬀicient,
while distributional methods offer richer post-hoc analysis at the cost of higher representational
complexity [42].
The statistical inference literature for iterative algorithms provides the technical foundation
for our nonparametric variance estimators. Chen et al. [17] developed batch-means estimators for
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) with asymptotic validity under functional central limit condi-
tions, and Zhu et al. [21] provided plug-in estimators for the asymptotic variance with finite-sample
guarantees. Xie et al. [18] introduced random scaling as a self-normalized estimator requiring no
nuisance parameter estimation, and Li et al. [20] extended random scaling to constant-step-size SGD
and nonlinear stochastic approximation with Markovian data, closely matching the TD learning
updates used in RL. Panda et al. [43] applied the FCLT and random scaling directly to a sample-
4


averaged Q-learning algorithm, establishing asymptotic normality of the Q-iterate and constructing
confidence intervals without estimating the asymptotic covariance. Ramprasad et al. [19] devel-
oped online bootstrap procedures for Q-learning and TD value estimation, proving consistency for
both tabular and linear function approximation settings. These methods were designed for uncer-
tainty quantification, with the original goal of providing valid confidence intervals around learned
estimates. We identify the connection that the same empirical variance estimates can be directly
repurposed as a risk signal within the policy update; to our knowledge this connection has not been
made previously in the risk-sensitive RL literature, and it provides a path to variance-penalized
RL that avoids the architectural and analytical complications of dual-critic methods.
3
Preliminaries
We consider an infinite-horizon discounted Markov decision process (MDP) defined by the tuple
⟨S, A, P, R, γ⟩, where S is the state space, A is the action space, P(s′|s, a) is the transition proba-
bility kernel, R(s, a) ∈R is the bounded reward function, and γ ∈[0, 1) is the discount factor. A
stochastic policy π(a|s) specifies the probability of selecting action a in state s.
The return from time t is the discounted cumulative reward:
Gt =
∞
X
ℓ=0
γℓRt+1+ℓ.
(2)
The state-value and action-value functions under policy π are:
V π(s) = Eπ

Gt | St = s

,
(3)
Qπ(s, a) = Eπ

Gt | St = s, At = a

.
(4)
The variance of return from a state-action pair (s, a) under policy π is:
σπ(s, a) = Eπ
h Gt −Qπ(s, a)
2  St = s, At = a
i
.
(5)
This variance can be estimated either indirectly via second-moment tracking, Eπ[G2
t ]−(Qπ(s, a))2 [10],
or directly via the TD-based recursive formula of Jain et al. [1] and Sherstan et al. [15]. Our frame-
work adopts neither approach as a learned function; instead it replaces σπ(s, a) with nonparametric
online estimates described in Section 4.
In the off-policy setting, a behavior policy b(a|s) generates experience used to improve a target
policy πθ(a|s). The importance sampling ratio at step t is ρt = πθ(At|St)/b(At|St), and the off-
policy return is Gt,π,b = Rt+1+γρt+1Gt+1,π,b [1]. For the parametric actor-critic, θ ∈Rd denotes the
policy parameters and w ∈Rm denotes the critic parameters. Step sizes satisfy the Robbins-Monro
conditions P
t αt = ∞, P
t α2
t < ∞.
4
Nonparametric Variance-Penalized Framework
4.1
The Variance-Penalized Objective
We adopt the mean-variance objective:
Jvar(π) = E[Gπ] −β Var(Gπ),
β > 0,
(6)
where β is the risk-aversion parameter.
Setting β = 0 recovers the standard expected-return
objective.
5


To incorporate the variance penalty into Bellman-style updates, we define the variance-penalized
value function:
F π(s) =
X
a
π(a|s)
h
Qπ(s, a) −β ˆσclip(s, a)
i
,
(7)
where ˆσclip(s, a) is a clipped nonparametric estimate of σπ(s, a) defined in Section 4.2.3. Using F π,
the penalized Bellman operator K acts on Q : S × A →R as:
(KQ)(s, a) = E
h
R(s, a) + γ max
π
F π(S′)
 S = s, A = a
i
,
(8)
where the maximization is over the choice of policy π at the next state S′. Because ˆσclip is bounded
by construction (see Section 4.2.3), the operator K is a contraction in the weighted maximum norm
for γ < 1, and its unique fixed point Q∗is the target of the variance-penalized Q-learning algorithm.
Remark 1. The operator K in (8) differs from the standard Bellman operator only in the substi-
tution maxa′ Q(S′, a′) →maxπ F π(S′). This single modification embeds the risk penalty into every
TD backup without requiring any additional learned component.
4.2
Nonparametric Variance Estimators
The central contribution of this framework is the replacement of a learned variance critic with two
nonparametric online estimators drawn from the statistical inference literature. Both are computed
incrementally from the observed Q-iterate and require no auxiliary network or additional gradient-
updated parameter.
4.2.1
Random Scaling Estimator (VPAC-RS)
The random scaling (RS) method was introduced by Xie and Zhang [18] for constant step-size
stochastic approximation and is grounded in a functional central limit theorem (FCLT) for the
Q-learning iterates viewed as a Markov chain. The key object is the self-normalized matrix
ˆVn = 1
n
n
X
j=1
 
1
√n
j
X
i=1
(Qi −¯Qn)
! 
1
√n
j
X
i=1
(Qi −¯Qn)
!⊤
,
(9)
where ¯Qn = n−1 Pn
i=1 Qi is the Polyak-Ruppert average of the Q-iterate and Qi ∈R|S||A| denotes
the full Q-table at step i, flattened into a vector. Under the FCLT established in Theorem 3.3 of Xie
and Zhang [18] (see also Li et al. [20] for the nonlinear SA extension), the diagonal of ˆVn provides
a consistent, nuisance-free estimate of the per-coordinate asymptotic variance of the Q-iterate.
The matrix ˆVn is computed in a single pass using the following online recursion. At iteration i
(starting from i = 0), the running mean is updated as
¯Qi = ¯Qi−1 ·
i
i + 1 + Qi ·
1
i + 1,
(10)
and two diagonal accumulators are maintained:
Adiag,i = Adiag,i−1 + (i + 1)2 [ ¯Qi]2,
(11)
bmat,i = bmat,i−1 + (i + 1)2 ¯Qi,
(12)
6


where squaring and multiplication are element-wise. The variance estimate at iteration i is then:
ˆVRS,i = Adiag,i −2 ¯Qi · bmat,i + Si [ ¯Qi]2
(i + 1)2
,
(13)
where Si = (i+1)(i+2)(2i+3)/6 is the cubic correction term equal to Pi+1
j=1 j2. The quantity [ ˆVRS,i]j
is the j-th diagonal element of ˆVn and measures how much the j-th coordinate of the Q-iterate
has varied around its running mean over the entire history of updates. High values at coordinate
(s, a) indicate that the Q-estimate at that state-action pair is uncertain, which corresponds to high
return variance there.
The RS estimator requires storing only three vectors of size |S||A| (i.e., ¯Q, Adiag, and bmat) and
involves O(|S||A|) operations per update. Under the FCLT conditions of [18], the resulting statistic
is a pivotal quantity whose asymptotic distribution does not depend on any nuisance parameter,
so no additional estimation step is required.
4.2.2
Online Bootstrap Estimator (VPAC-BS)
The online bootstrap (BS) estimator follows the ensemble approach of Ramprasad et al. [19]. An
ensemble of K independent Q-tables {Q(k)}K
k=1 is maintained in parallel alongside the primary Q-
table Q. At each transition (St, At, Rt+1, St+1), each replicate Q(k) decides independently whether
to learn from that transition by drawing a Bernoulli(0.5) mask m(k)
t
∈{0, 1}:
Q(k)
t+1(St, At) = Q(k)
t (St, At) + m(k)
t
αt
 yt −Q(k)
t (St, At)

,
m(k)
t
∼Bernoulli(0.5),
(14)
where yt = Rt+1 + γ maxa′ Q(St+1, a′) is the TD target computed from the primary table and the
masks are i.i.d. across replicates and time steps. The variance estimate at state-action pair (s, a)
is the cross-replicate sample variance:
ˆVBS,t(s, a) =
1
K −1
K
X
k=1

Q(k)
t (s, a) −¯Qens
t
(s, a)
2
,
(15)
where ¯Qens
t
(s, a) = K−1 PK
k=1 Q(k)
t (s, a). The Bernoulli subsampling introduces independent per-
turbations across replicates: each table sees a different random subset of the experience stream,
so their predictions diverge in proportion to the uncertainty in the value estimate at (s, a). Ram-
prasad et al. [19] prove that statistics of this form are consistent for both tabular and linear function
approximation settings under Markovian data. We use K = 10 replicates in all experiments. The
memory cost is K copies of the primary Q-table; the per-step update cost is O(K) scalar operations.
4.2.3
Variance Clipping
Both estimators produce non-negative values but can exhibit transient large values early in training
before the Q-estimates stabilize. To ensure that the variance penalty remains a bounded perturba-
tion of the standard Bellman operator (which is required for the convergence analysis in Section 5),
we apply element-wise clipping:
ˆσclip(s, a) = min
  ˆV (s, a), cmax

,
(16)
where ˆV is either [ ˆVRS](s,a) or ˆVBS(s, a), and cmax > 0 is a hyperparameter. In our experiments,
cmax is set adaptively as a fraction of the current mean |Q| magnitude to prevent the penalty from
7


Table 1: Architectural comparison: VPAC [1] versus the proposed nonparametric variants.
Method
Learned components
Timescales
Extra hyperparameters
VPAC
ˆQ, ˆσ, πθ
3
αz, z-architecture
VPAC-RS (ours)
ˆQ, πθ
2
ασ, cmax
VPAC-BS (ours)
ˆQ, {Q(k)}, πθ
2
K, cmax
overwhelming the value signal during early training. Once the iterates stabilize, both estimators
remain well below cmax, so clipping has no effect on the long-run behavior. Its role is purely to
provide the uniform bound on the variance penalty that Theorem 1 and Theorem 2 require.
4.3
Architectural Comparison with VPAC
The primary architectural difference between our framework and the dual-critic Variance-Penalized
Actor-Critic (VPAC) of Jain et al. [1] is summarized in Table 1. VPAC maintains three separate
learned components updated on three different timescales: the value critic ˆQ(s, a, w), the variance
critic ˆσ(s, a, z), and the policy πθ.
The step sizes must satisfy αθ < αz < αw to ensure that
each component converges before the next is updated.
Our framework eliminates the variance
critic entirely. The variance estimate is computed nonparametrically from the TD-error trajec-
tory (VPAC-RS) or from an ensemble of Q-table replicates (VPAC-BS), reducing the system to
two timescales and removing the hyperparameter αz and the architecture choice for the variance
network.
4.4
Variance-Penalized Q-Learning
The tabular variance-penalized Q-learning update replaces the standard greedy Bellman target
with the penalized operator K in (8):
Qt+1(s, a) ←Qt(s, a) + αt

Rt+1
+ γ max
π
F π(St+1) −Qt(s, a)

,
(17)
where F π(St+1) is computed via (7) using the current Q-table and the clipped variance estimate.
Algorithm 1 presents the complete procedure.
4.5
Variance-Penalized Off-Policy Actor-Critic
We extend the framework to a continuous-state off-policy actor-critic with a parameterized policy
πθ(a|s) and a single value critic Qw(s, a). Following Jain et al. [1], the off-policy mean-variance
objective is:
Jd0(θ) = Es∼d0, a∼b

ρ(s, a)
 Qπ(s, a) −β ˆσclip(s, a)

,
(18)
where ρ(s, a) = πθ(a|s)/b(a|s) is the importance sampling ratio and d0 is an initial state distribution.
Our departure from Jain et al. is that ˆσclip is supplied nonparametrically by RS or BS rather than
by a learned ˆσ(s, a, z).
The variance-penalized policy gradient is:
∇θJ(θ) = E
 Qw(s, a) −β ˆσclip(s, a)

∇θ log πθ(a|s)

.
(19)
8


Algorithm 1 Variance-Penalized Q-Learning (VPAC-RS / VPAC-BS)
1: Input: penalty β, discount γ, step sizes {αt}, clip bound cmax, estimator choice ∈{RS, BS}
2: Initialize: Q(s, a) ←0, ˆσ(s, a) ←0 for all (s, a)
3: for episode = 1 to Nep do
4:
Observe initial state S
5:
for step = 1 to Niter do
6:
Select A ∼ϵ-greedy w.r.t. Q
7:
Execute A; observe R, S′
8:
Compute TD error: δ ←R + γ maxa′ Q(S′, a′) −Q(S, A)
9:
Update variance estimate ˆσ(S, A) via (13) (RS) or (15) (BS)
10:
Clip: ˆσclip(S′, a′) = min(ˆσ(S′, a′), cmax) for all a′
11:
Compute penalized next-state value: F(S′) = maxa′
Q(S′, a′) −β ˆσclip(S′, a′)

12:
Update Q-table: Q(S, A) ←Q(S, A) + αt
 R + γF(S′) −Q(S, A)

13:
S ←S′
14:
end for
15: end for
The critic is updated toward the variance-penalized TD target:
yt = Rt+1 + γ (1 −dt) F(St+1),
(20)
where dt ∈{0, 1} is the episode-termination flag and
F(St+1) =
X
a′
πθ(a′|St+1)

Qw(St+1, a′) −β ˆσclip(St+1, a′)

.
(21)
Algorithm 2 presents the complete off-policy procedure. The algorithm uses two timescales:
αw ≫αθ so that the critic converges before the actor parameters are significantly moved, consistent
with the standard two-timescale actor-critic analysis [22, 36]. The same algorithm applies to the
on-policy setting by setting ρ ≡1 and removing the importance-sampling corrections in the TD
target.
5
Convergence Analysis
We establish almost-sure convergence for both algorithms introduced in Section 4.
Theorem 1
shows that the variance-penalized Q-learning iterates converge to the unique fixed point Q∗of the
penalized Bellman operator K. Theorem 2 shows that the actor parameters in the two-timescale
actor-critic converge to a stationary point of the variance-penalized objective Jvar(θ).
Both proofs use the ordinary differential equation (ODE) method of Borkar [22], which es-
tablishes almost-sure convergence of a stochastic approximation (SA) recursion by analyzing the
asymptotic behavior of an associated deterministic ODE. The key observation that enables the
proofs is that the nonparametric variance estimate ˆσclip appears identically in both arguments of
any difference KQ1 −KQ2, so it cancels when establishing the contraction property of K. As a
consequence, the convergence analysis requires only that ˆσclip be uniformly bounded, not that it
be consistent. This is a strict relaxation of the assumptions used by dual-critic methods such as
VPAC [1], where the variance critic must converge to the true second moment. We analyze the
on-policy setting in detail here; the off-policy extension with importance sampling follows by the
same argument with appropriately modified martingale conditions, and its proof is deferred to the
appendix.
9


Algorithm 2 Nonparametric Variance-Penalized Off-Policy Actor-Critic (VPAC-RS / VPAC-BS)
1: Input: penalty β, discount γ, learning rates αw ≫αθ, clip bound cmax, estimator ∈{RS, BS},
behavior policy b
2: Initialize: policy parameters θ, critic parameters w, variance estimates ˆσ(s, a) ←0
3: for episode n = 1 to N do
4:
Sample S0 ∼d0, A0 ∼b(·|S0)
5:
for step t = 0, 1, . . . until termination do
6:
Execute At; observe Rt+1, St+1, done flag dt
7:
Compute ρt = πθ(At|St)/b(At|St)
8:
Update variance estimate ˆσ(St, At) via (13) (RS) or (15) (BS)
9:
Clip: ˆσclip(s, a) = min(ˆσ(s, a), cmax) for relevant (s, a)
10:
Compute penalized next-state value F(St+1) via (21)
11:
Compute TD target: yt = Rt+1 + γ(1 −dt)F(St+1)
12:
Update critic: w ←w −αw∇w
 Qw(St, At) −yt
2
13:
Compute variance-adjusted advantage: ˆAt = Qw(St, At) −β ˆσclip(St, At)
14:
Update actor: θ ←θ + αθ ˆAt ∇θ log πθ(At|St)
15:
St ←St+1; sample At+1 ∼b(·|St+1)
16:
end for
17: end for
5.1
Assumptions
Assumption 1 (Ergodicity). For any fixed stationary policy π, the Markov chain (St, At)t≥0 is
irreducible and aperiodic, with a unique stationary distribution µπ over S × A.
Assumption 1 ensures that time averages of functions of the trajectory converge to their expec-
tations under µπ, which is necessary for the noise terms in the SA recursion to satisfy the martingale
condition required by the ODE method. It is standard in convergence analyses of Q-learning and
actor-critic algorithms [22, 36].
Assumption 2 (Bounded Rewards). The reward function satisfies |R(s, a)| ≤Rmax < ∞for all
(s, a) ∈S × A.
Assumption 2 ensures that the martingale difference noise Mt+1 in the Q-learning recursion has
bounded conditional variance, which is required for the noise condition in Borkar’s Theorem 2.2 [22].
Under this assumption, the optimal Q-function satisfies ∥Q∗∥∞≤Rmax/(1 −γ).
Assumption 3 (Bounded Variance Estimates). The clipped variance estimate satisfies 0 ≤ˆσclip(s, a) ≤
cmax < ∞for all (s, a) and all t ≥0.
Assumption 3 is enforced algorithmically by the clipping operation in (16) and holds by con-
struction for both the RS and BS estimators.
Critically, this assumption does not require the
estimate to be accurate or consistent; it requires only that the variance penalty remain bounded,
ensuring that the penalized Bellman operator K is a well-defined contraction.
Assumption 4 (Step-Size Conditions). The learning rate sequences {αt} (Q-learning), {αw,t}
(critic), and {αθ,t} (actor) are positive and satisfy the Robbins-Monro conditions:
∞
X
t=0
αt = ∞,
∞
X
t=0
α2
t < ∞.
(22)
10


For the two-timescale actor-critic, the step sizes additionally satisfy the separation condition:
lim
t→∞
αθ,t
αw,t
= 0,
(23)
so that the critic update operates on a strictly faster timescale than the actor update.
The conditions in (22) are the classical Robbins-Monro conditions that prevent the step size
from decaying too quickly (sum to infinity) while ensuring eventual convergence (square-summable).
The separation condition (23) is the standard requirement for two-timescale SA [22, 36]: from the
actor’s perspective the critic appears to have converged, and from the critic’s perspective the actor
moves infinitely slowly.
Assumption 5 (Bounded Iterates). The Q-learning and actor-critic iterates are almost surely
bounded: supt ∥Qt∥∞< ∞a.s. and supt(∥wt∥+ ∥θt∥) < ∞a.s.
Assumption 5 is standard in the SA literature and corresponds to condition (A4) of Borkar [22].
In the tabular setting with bounded rewards and γ < 1, the Q-iterates are naturally bounded by
Rmax/(1 −γ) under any reasonable initialization and step-size schedule.
The assumption may
alternatively be enforced by projecting iterates onto a compact set at each step without affecting
the convergence argument [36].
Assumption 6 (Smooth Policy Parameterization). The policy πθ(a|s) is differentiable in θ for all
(s, a), and the score function is Lipschitz: there exists Lθ < ∞such that
∥∇θ log πθ(a|s) −∇θ log πθ′(a|s)∥≤Lθ∥θ −θ′∥
(24)
for all (s, a) and all θ, θ′.
Assumption 6 ensures that the drift function of the actor ODE is Lipschitz continuous, which
is required for the ODE limit to uniquely track the SA recursion.
It is satisfied by standard
parameterizations including softmax policies and Gaussian policies with bounded covariance.
5.2
Convergence of Variance-Penalized Q-Learning
Theorem 1 (Almost-Sure Convergence of Variance-Penalized Q-Learning). Under Assumptions 1–
5, the iterates {Qt} generated by Algorithm 1 converge almost surely to the unique fixed point Q∗
of the penalized Bellman operator K defined in (8):
lim
t→∞Qt(s, a) = Q∗(s, a)
a.s.,
∀(s, a) ∈S × A.
(25)
Proof Sketch. We verify the the conditions of Borkar’s Theorem 2.2 [22] for the SA recursion
Qt+1 = Qt + αt(h(Qt) + Mt+1), where h(Q) = KQ −Q and
Mt+1(st, at) =
 Rt+1 + γ max
π
F π(St+1)

−(KQt)(st, at)
(26)
is the martingale difference sequence.
Step 1: Contraction of K and global stability of the ODE. Let Q1, Q2 be any two Q-functions
and let π1 = arg maxπ F π
Q1(s′) and π2 = arg maxπ F π
Q2(s′). Since ˆσclip is the same in both F π
Q1 and
11


F π
Q2, it cancels in the difference:
|(KQ1)(s, a) −(KQ2)(s, a)| ≤γ E
hF π1
Q1(S′) −F π1
Q2(S′)

 s, a
i
= γ E
h
X
a′
π1(a′|S′)
 Q1(S′, a′)
−Q2(S′, a′)

 s, a
i
≤γ∥Q1 −Q2∥∞.
(27)
Thus K is a γ-contraction in ∥· ∥∞and has a unique fixed point Q∗by Banach’s theorem. The
drift function h(Q) = KQ −Q is Lipschitz with constant 1 + γ and the ODE ˙Q(t) = h(Q(t)) has
Q∗as its unique globally asymptotically stable equilibrium.
Step 2: Martingale difference condition. Because E[Mt+1 | Ft] = 0 (where Ft = σ(Q0, . . . , Qt, S0, A0, . . . , St, At))
and rewards and ˆσclip are both bounded (Assumptions 2 and 3), the conditional second moment
satisfies E[M2
t+1 | Ft] ≤C(1 + ∥Qt∥2
∞) for a constant C > 0.
Step 3: Step-size and boundedness conditions. These are directly supplied by Assumptions 4
and 5.
Conclusion. All conditions of Borkar’s Theorem 2.2 are satisfied. Therefore Qt →Q∗almost
surely. The full proof, including verification of the noise growth condition and the stable equilibrium
argument, is given in Appendix B.
Remark 2. The contraction in Step 1 holds for any bounded ˆσclip, regardless of whether it is close
to the true σπ. This is the key distinction from dual-critic methods: in VPAC, the variance critic
must converge to the true second moment for the operator to be well-defined, requiring a third
timescale and a consistency assumption. Here, the fixed point Q∗depends on the specific realization
of ˆσclip, but its existence and uniqueness are guaranteed by boundedness alone.
5.3
Convergence of the Two-Timescale Actor-Critic
In the on-policy actor-critic setting, the critic parameters wt track the variance-penalized TD target
and the actor parameters θt follow the policy gradient. The step-size separation in Assumption 4
means that from the critic’s perspective the actor is quasi-static, and from the actor’s perspective
the critic has converged. We make this precise via Borkar’s two-timescale framework (Chapter 6
of [22]).
Theorem 2 (Almost-Sure Convergence of the Variance-Penalized Actor-Critic). Under Assump-
tions 1–6, bounded features and policy scores on the relevant compact parameter set, and the
standard linear TD stability condition that the on-policy system matrix G(θ) = A(θ) −γC(θ) is
uniformly positive definite, the critic parameters wt in Algorithm 2 track the equilibrium induced
by the current policy:
wt −w∗(θt) →0
a.s.
(28)
The actor iterates θt track the ODE
˙θ = g(θ, w∗(θ)) = ∇θJvar(θ),
(29)
12


where
∇θJvar(θ) = E(s,a)∼µπθ
h Qw∗(θ)(s, a) −β ˆσclip(s, a)

× ∇θ log πθ(a|s)
i
.
(30)
Consequently, the limit set of {θt} is almost surely contained in the set of stationary points of Jvar.
If the stationary points of Jvar are isolated, then θt converges almost surely to a single stationary
point θ∗satisfying ∇θJvar(θ∗) = 0.
Proof Sketch. We decompose the analysis into the two timescales.
Faster timescale (critic). For a quasi-static actor parameter θ, the critic update
wt+1 = wt −αw,t ∇w
 Qw(St, At) −yt
2
(31)
is a stochastic approximation recursion with Markovian observation noise. Under linear function
approximation, its mean field takes the form
hw(w, θ) = bvar(θ) −G(θ)w,
G(θ) = A(θ) −γC(θ),
(32)
where the variance penalty enters only through bvar(θ) and G(θ) retains the structure of the standard
on-policy linear TD system matrix. Under the assumed uniform positive definiteness of G(θ), the
critic ODE has the unique globally asymptotically stable equilibrium
w∗(θ) = G(θ)−1bvar(θ),
(33)
and wt →w∗(θ) almost surely by Borkar’s Theorem 2.2. The map θ 7→w∗(θ) is continuous by the
implicit function theorem under Assumption 6.
Slower timescale (actor). Because αθ,t/αw,t →0, the actor sees the critic as already at equi-
librium w∗(θt). Treating ˆσclip as a fixed bounded penalty within each mean-field evaluation, the
same convention used for θ being quasi-static from the critic’s perspective, the actor update ap-
proximately tracks the ODE
˙θ(t) = Eµπθ(t)
h
ˆQvar(s, a) ∇θ log πθ(t)(a|s)
i
,
(34)
where ˆQvar(s, a) = Qw∗(θ)(s, a) −β ˆσclip(s, a). Because ˆσclip is bounded (Assumption 3) and the
critic features and policy score are bounded on the compact parameter set under Assumption 6, ˆQvar
is bounded and the drift function of (65) is Lipschitz. The right-hand side of (65) equals ∇θJvar(θ),
so the actor ODE is the gradient flow of the variance-penalized objective, and its equilibria satisfy
∇θJvar(θ∗) = 0. The sample noise in both the critic and actor recursions satisfies the bounded
Markov-noise conditions of Borkar’s two-timescale framework under Assumptions 1, 2, 3, and 5.
Conclusion. By Borkar’s two-timescale theorem (Theorem 2, Chapter 6 of [22]), the coupled
iterates (wt, θt) satisfy wt −w∗(θt) →0 almost surely, and the limit set of {θt} is almost surely
contained in the stationary set of the actor ODE. When the stationary points of Jvar are isolated,
this limit set is a single point θ∗. The full proof is given in Appendix C.
Remark 3. Theorem 2 guarantees convergence to the stationary set of Jvar, and to a single
stationary point under isolated equilibria, not necessarily a global maximum, which is standard for
policy gradient methods in non-convex settings [1]. The induced stationary points generally need
not coincide with those obtained using the true variance σπ; the discrepancy is controlled by the
magnitude of the penalty term and vanishes as β →0. The proof requires only two timescales,
compared to the three required by VPAC [1]. Within each mean-field evaluation, ˆσclip is treated
as a fixed bounded penalty; under this convention, consistency of the variance estimator with the
true return variance is not required for convergence to a stationary point of the induced penalized
objective.
13


5.4
Discussion
Finite-sample analysis.
Theorems 1 and 2 establish almost-sure asymptotic convergence but do
not provide finite-sample rates. Deriving such rates in the present setting faces two obstacles. First,
the nonparametric variance estimates are functions of the entire trajectory history, so bounding
their finite-sample bias and variance under Markovian data requires tools from the functional CLT
literature [18] that are not directly compatible with existing finite-sample SA frameworks. Second,
the two-timescale structure introduces an additional coupling between the critic and actor conver-
gence rates. Recent work [34, 39, 40] has made progress on finite-sample actor-critic rates under
specific architectural assumptions; extending these results to accommodate bounded-nonparametric
variance penalties is an important open direction that we discuss further in Section 8.
Off-policy extension.
The convergence argument for the off-policy actor-critic (Algorithm 2
with ρt̸ = 1) follows the same two-timescale structure, with the importance sampling ratios ρt
modifying the martingale difference terms in the SA recursion. Provided ρt is clipped to a finite
maximum ratio (a standard practice in off-policy RL), the noise conditions are unchanged and
Borkar’s theorem applies without modification. The formal proof, including the modified martingale
conditions and the off-policy policy gradient expression of Theorem 4 in Jain et al. [1], is given in
Appendix D.
6
Numerical Experiments
We evaluate the proposed nonparametric variance-penalized framework in two benchmark settings
of increasing complexity: a discrete 12 × 12 noisy puddle world and its continuous-state extension.
These environments are the canonical benchmarks for variance-sensitive RL because the ground-
truth variance structure is computable by design, allowing direct verification that the learned
policies avoid the correct high-variance regions [1, 15]. Standard continuous control benchmarks
such as MuJoCo mix model uncertainty with environment stochasticity in ways that obscure the
variance-reduction signal, so we follow the experimental protocol of Jain et al. [1] and Prashanth
and Ghavamzadeh [13] in using puddle world as the primary testbed.
6.1
Experimental Setup
6.1.1
Environment
The puddle world environment contains a 12×12 grid (discrete setting) or a unit-square continuous
state space (continuous setting), with a contiguous region of frozen states in the center. In normal
states the agent receives a reward of 0; in frozen states the reward is drawn from a stochastic
distribution, creating a high-variance zone the agent can learn to avoid. The goal state yields a
reward of +50.
Because the expected reward in frozen and normal states is equal on average,
a risk-neutral agent has no incentive to avoid the frozen region; only a variance-penalized agent
learns to do so. Uniform noise on frozen rewards is used in the discrete setting, consistent with the
off-policy variant of [1], and Gaussian noise is used in the continuous setting. The discount factor
is γ = 0.99 throughout.
6.1.2
Baselines
We compare four methods: AC (vanilla actor-critic, β = 0, risk-neutral baseline), VPAC (Jain
et al. [1], dual-critic with a learned variance network), VPAC-RS (proposed, random scaling
14


estimator), and VPAC-BS (proposed, bootstrap ensemble estimator).
6.1.3
Penalty Coeﬀicient Selection
Each method is evaluated at its best-performing β value, identified by a grid search over β ∈
{0.001, 0.002, 0.005, 0.01, 0.05, 0.1, 0.3} with the criterion of minimising return variance subject to
at most a 5% reduction in mean return. We do not fix β equal across methods because β multiplies
fundamentally different quantities in each case: in VPAC it scales a learned TD-based variance
estimate whose magnitude is on the order of (Rmax/(1 −γ))2, in VPAC-RS it scales the diagonal
of the partial-sum matrix ˆVn whose magnitude depends on the step size and trajectory length,
and in VPAC-BS it scales a cross-replicate sample variance of Q-table predictions. Setting β equal
across methods would therefore produce incommensurable risk-aversion levels rather than a fair
comparison. The selected β values are reported in Table 3.
6.1.4
Implementation Details
All experiments are run with 10 independent random seeds.
Results are reported as mean ±
one standard deviation across seeds, with learning curves smoothed using an exponential moving
average with coeﬀicient αsmooth = 0.03 for returns and αsmooth = 0.05 for variance. Smoothing is
applied identically across all methods and does not affect the summary statistics reported in tables,
which are computed from unsmoothed rollouts of the converged policy.
In the discrete setting, agents are trained for 1,000 episodes with a maximum of 500 steps per
episode. In the continuous setting, training runs for 2,000 episodes with a maximum of 5,000 steps
per episode, using tile coding with 10 tilings and 5 bins per dimension over a 1,024-dimensional
feature vector. Variance estimates are updated every 20 steps in both settings. For VPAC-RS,
a warm-up of 5 episodes is applied before the variance penalty is activated, allowing the running
statistics to accumulate a suﬀicient history before influencing the policy. For VPAC-BS, the ensem-
ble of K = 10 Q-tables is initialised identically and begins receiving Bernoulli(0.5)-masked updates
from the first episode. Full hyperparameter settings are given in Table 3 in Appendix A.
6.2
Discrete (Tabular) Setting
6.2.1
Q-Learning with Empirical Variance Penalties
We first evaluate the variance-penalized Q-learning algorithm (Algorithm 1) in isolation, compar-
ing the two nonparametric estimators across a range of penalty coeﬀicients. The tabular setting
provides a controlled baseline because the Q-function is exact (no function approximation error), al-
lowing the effect of the variance estimator to be evaluated without confounding from approximation
bias.
Figure 1 shows results for VPAC-RS. The left panel shows that mean episodic return remains
approximately stable across all penalty coeﬀicients (β ∈{0, 0.01, 0.1, 0.3}), converging to roughly
35–40 in all cases, confirming that the variance penalty does not significantly degrade expected-
return performance. The right panel shows a monotone reduction in return variance as β increases:
the baseline (β = 0) reaches a steady-state variance of approximately 3,000, while β = 0.1 achieves
approximately 500, an 83% reduction.
At β = 0.3, variance is reduced further but at a mild
cost to mean return, reflecting excessive avoidance of the frozen region. The best risk-adjusted
configuration is β = 0.1.
Figure 2 shows corresponding results for VPAC-BS. The bootstrapping estimator produces
qualitatively similar behaviour: higher β suppresses policy excursions into the frozen region and
15



	
	
	

	
	
	
  





 !"
# !"  #     

  

  	

  

  	

  

	
	
	

	
	
	
  

	

	

	
  !" 
  !"  #     

  

  	

  

  	

  
Figure 1: Q-learning with random scaling variance penalties (VPAC-RS) in the discrete puddle
world. Left: mean episodic return (smoothed) across penalty coeﬀicients β ∈{0, 0.01, 0.1, 0.3}.
Right: return variance over training.
The baseline (β = 0) reaches a steady-state variance of
∼3,000; β = 0.1 achieves ∼500 (83% reduction) while maintaining comparable mean return. Error
bars show ±1 standard error of the mean across 10 seeds, plotted at sampled intervals for clarity.
produces more stable convergence, with comparable mean return across all penalty values. The
variance reduction is consistent with VPAC-RS but tends to be more gradual early in training,
reflecting the time required for the bootstrap ensemble to accumulate suﬀicient cross-replicate
disagreement before the penalty is informative.
6.2.2
Sensitivity to β
The monotone relationship between β and variance reduction visible in Figures 1 and 2 confirms
that the variance penalty is well-behaved across a broad range of coeﬀicient values. Both VPAC-RS
and VPAC-BS achieve meaningful variance reduction (greater than 30%) for any β ≥0.01, with
the mean return degrading by less than 5% for β ≤0.1. A practical grid search over one order of
magnitude is therefore suﬀicient to identify a performant β for both methods.
6.2.3
Actor-Critic Comparison
Figure 3 presents the four-way actor-critic comparison (AC, VPAC, VPAC-RS, VPAC-BS) on mean
return (left) and return variance (right). All three variance-penalized methods achieve substantially
lower steady-state return variance than the risk-neutral AC baseline. VPAC-RS and VPAC-BS
match or exceed the variance reduction of VPAC while eliminating the learned variance critic:
VPAC-RS requires no additional learned parameters beyond the primary Q-table, and VPAC-BS
requires K additional Q-tables but no additional gradient-updated parameter or step-size schedule.
Figure 4 illustrates the qualitative behaviour of the four converged policies via representative
trajectories from a common initial state. The risk-neutral AC policy traverses the frozen region
directly, while VPAC, VPAC-RS, and VPAC-BS all learn to circumnavigate the frozen zone, taking
a longer but lower-variance path to the goal.
To provide population-level evidence of avoidance behaviour beyond representative trajectories,
Figure 5 shows state-visitation frequency heatmaps accumulated across 10 seeds and 98 trajectory
rollouts per seed for each converged policy. The AC policy visits the frozen zone on a substantial
proportion of trajectories, with clearly elevated counts inside the red boundary, consistent with the
absence of any variance penalty. VPAC learns partial avoidance via a bottom routing strategy:
16

















 




	


 !
" !"  






























 !
 !"  





Figure 2: Q-learning with bootstrap variance penalties (VPAC-BS) in the discrete puddle world.
Higher β values suppress early-training policy excursions into the frozen region and produce more
stable convergence. Error bars show ±1 standard error of the mean across 10 seeds, plotted at
sampled intervals for clarity.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Episodes
−30
−20
−10
0
10
20
30
40
50
Return
Average Re urns: VPAC Varian s Comparison
VPAC
VPAC-RS
AC
VPAC-BS
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Episodes
400
600
800
1000
1200
Variance in Re urn
Variance Comparison: VPAC Varian s
VPAC
VPAC-RS
AC
VPAC-BS
Figure 3: Actor-critic comparison in the discrete puddle world. Left: mean episodic return. Right:
return variance. VPAC-RS and VPAC-BS match or exceed the variance reduction of the dual-critic
VPAC baseline while requiring no learned variance critic. Error bars show ±1 standard error of
the mean across 10 seeds, plotted at sampled intervals for clarity.
visitation concentrates along the lower perimeter of the grid, largely bypassing the frozen zone,
though at the cost of longer and more variable trajectories. VPAC-RS and VPAC-BS both achieve
near-complete avoidance of the frozen zone, with the interior uniformly pale across all seeds, and
visitation concentrated along the upper-right path toward the goal. The heatmaps confirm that the
variance-reduction behaviour reported in Figures 1–3 reflects a population-level policy shift and is
not an artefact of individual trajectories.
6.3
Continuous-State Setting
The evaluation extends to the continuous puddle world to assess whether the variance-reduction
behaviour transfers beyond the tabular setting.
The state space is the unit square [0, 1]2, the
frozen region is a circular puddle centered at (0.5, 0.5) with radius 0.2, and the tile-coded feature
representation introduces approximation error absent in the tabular setting.
Figure 6 shows mean return and return variance over training for all four methods. All methods
17


Figure 4: Representative trajectories from a common initial state in the discrete puddle world (left
to right: AC, VPAC, VPAC-RS, VPAC-BS). The risk-neutral AC policy traverses the frozen region
(grey center block); all three variance-penalized policies route around it.
Figure 5: State-visitation frequency heatmaps in the discrete puddle world, averaged over 10 seeds
and 98 trajectory rollouts per seed per method (left to right: AC, VPAC, VPAC-RS, VPAC-BS).
Darker shading indicates higher visitation frequency; the red rectangle marks the boundary of the
frozen zone. The goal state is excluded from the colour normalisation. AC exhibits frequent frozen
zone traversal. VPAC adopts a bottom routing strategy that largely avoids the frozen zone. VPAC-
RS and VPAC-BS both achieve near-complete frozen zone avoidance, with visitation concentrated
on an upper-right route to the goal.
converge to comparable expected returns (approximately 35–40), confirming that variance penalisa-
tion does not sacrifice task performance. VPAC-RS and VPAC-BS both achieve lower steady-state
return variance than the AC baseline, with approximately 40–50% reduction relative to AC and
performance competitive with VPAC. The variance reduction is less pronounced than in the tabular
setting, which is expected: the tile-coded approximation introduces background noise in the value
estimates that partially attenuates the variance signal.
Figure 7 shows representative trajectories in the continuous state space. The AC policy fre-
quently passes through the puddle region, while VPAC-RS and VPAC-BS both learn to route
around it, reaching the goal via a longer but lower-variance path.
6.4
Discussion
6.4.1
Comparison of VPAC-RS and VPAC-BS
Both nonparametric estimators achieve consistent variance reduction across the discrete and con-
tinuous settings. A structural difference emerges in environments with predominantly aleatoric
uncertainty versus epistemic uncertainty. The RS estimator measures trajectory-level variability
of the Q-iterate around its running mean, which is directly tied to fluctuations in the Bellman
18





	



	

  
 
 
 



!"
#!" 
!  







	



	

  




!"
 
! 




Figure 6: Performance in the continuous-state puddle world. Left: mean episodic return. Right:
return variance over training. VPAC-RS and VPAC-BS achieve 40–50% variance reduction relative
to the AC baseline while maintaining comparable mean return. Error bars show ±1 standard error
of the mean across 10 seeds, plotted at sampled intervals for clarity.














	
%
$"$
 
!







	
%
$"$
 
!







	
%
$"$
 
!







	

%
$"$
 
!
	 	!"$ " $# "$!"#   ! $ %!%# % !"
Figure 7: Representative trajectories in the continuous puddle world. The shaded region indicates
the high-variance puddle. The risk-neutral AC policy (left) passes through the puddle; VPAC-RS
and VPAC-BS (right) route consistently around it.
target caused by stochastic rewards.
It is therefore well matched to the puddle world setting,
where the dominant noise source is the stochastic frozen-zone reward. The BS estimator measures
cross-replicate disagreement among Q-table predictions, which reflects the sensitivity of the value
estimate to random subsampling of the experience stream. In settings where epistemic uncertainty
is the primary source of outcome variability (for example, sparse data or nonstationarity), BS
may be better suited. This distinction is examined further in the HTS manufacturing case study
(Section 7), where the aleatoric dominance of sensor noise makes RS the more effective estimator.
6.4.2
Computational Overhead
Table 1 (Section 4) summarises the architectural comparison across methods. In the tabular discrete
setting, VPAC-RS adds effectively zero computational overhead relative to vanilla AC: the RS
recursion requires three vector additions and one element-wise division per step. VPAC-BS incurs
the cost of maintaining and updating K = 10 additional Q-tables, a constant-factor overhead
of approximately 10× the per-step update cost of AC but with no additional gradient-updated
parameter or convergence monitoring. VPAC, by contrast, requires a full third learned function
approximator with its own step-size schedule. In the continuous tile-coded setting, the overhead
structure is identical: VPAC-RS adds no additional computation, and VPAC-BS adds K parallel
tile-coded value function evaluations per step.
19


6.4.3
Consistency with Convergence Theory
The empirical results are consistent with the convergence guarantees established in Section 5. Both
VPAC-RS and VPAC-BS achieve stable convergence across all evaluated configurations using the
same step-size schedules as AC, consistent with the contraction property of the penalized Bellman
operator K in Theorem 1. The variance clipping mechanism in (16) limits the influence of early-
training transients on the policy update, as required by the bounded perturbation condition in
Assumption 3, and both estimators remain well below cmax once the Q-estimates stabilise.
7
Case Study: Risk-Sensitive RL for HTS Manufacturing
Industrial process control provides a natural application domain for risk-sensitive RL because con-
sistency of outcome is operationally critical [44]. Reinforcement learning has been applied to energy
management in buildings and grids [8] and to semiconductor and materials manufacturing [42], with
risk-sensitive variants typically using CVaR or chance-constrained formulations. To our knowledge,
no prior work has applied a nonparametric variance-penalized RL method to a real industrial
manufacturing dataset of the scale considered here.
The experiments in Section 6 establish variance reduction in controlled synthetic environments
where ground-truth noise structure is known by design. To evaluate practical applicability, we now
present a case study in high-temperature superconductor (HTS) wire manufacturing using real
industrial sensor data. The HTS domain is selected for three reasons. First, the process involves
continuous adjustments to two coupled control parameters, testing whether the framework scales
beyond the discrete 12×12 grid of Section 6. Second, the dataset comprises 58,240 real sensor
measurements across 970 minutes of production, with complex temporal dependencies and non-
stationary dynamics that provide a realistic challenge for empirical variance estimation. Third,
reducing variability in the critical current Ic directly improves manufacturing yield and equipment
reliability, providing a concrete, interpretable downstream metric for evaluating risk-sensitive learn-
ing.
7.1
Dataset and Surrogate Environment
The dataset originates from a multi-zone HTS wire production line and records both control pa-
rameters and process outputs at 10-second intervals. The primary quality metric is the critical
current Ic [A], the maximum current a superconducting tape can carry without resistive loss. High
Ic is commercially desirable; variability in Ic across a production run is equally damaging, as it
reduces the proportion of tape meeting specification and complicates downstream engineering.
The two actuatable control parameters are DHPS_I and DHPS_V, which govern the deposi-
tion heater power supply current and voltage respectively, with feasible operating ranges DHPS_I
∈[23.14, 23.19] A and DHPS_V ∈[47.44, 49.33] V. A Ridge Regression surrogate model (regulari-
sation λ = 1.0) trained on the full dataset predicts Ic from the current state with R2 = 0.9964 and
RMSE = 0.0071, providing a reliable reward signal for policy learning. Feature importance analysis
confirms that recent Ic history and the DHPS control parameters are the dominant predictors.
7.2
MDP Formulation
We formulate the HTS process as an MDP with the following components.
20


7.2.1
State Space
The state st ∈R8 encodes the current manufacturing conditions:
st =

^
DHPS_It,
^
DHPS_Vt, Ic,t−1,
Ic,t−2, Ic,t−3, sin
  2πt
T

,
cos
  2πt
T

,
t
L

.
(35)
where tildes denote min-max normalisation, T is the dominant production cycle period, and L =
3,203 cm is the line length. The three lagged Ic values capture the strong autoregressive dynamics
arising from thermal inertia in the deposition zone. The two trigonometric features encode cyclic
patterns in zone-temperature controllers, and the linear trend t/L accounts for spatial drift along
the production line.
7.2.2
Action Space
The agent selects incremental adjustments at = (∆DHPS_It, ∆DHPS_Vt) ∈[−0.5, 0.5]2, scaled by
an action-gain parameter κ > 0 that controls the physical magnitude of each adjustment. Primary
results are reported at κ = 1.5, identified through a sensitivity analysis over κ ∈{0.75, 1.5, 2.0}.
At κ = 0.75, the DHPS adjustments are insuﬀicient to produce meaningful Ic changes within a
200-step episode; at κ = 2.0, boundary noise dominates the variance signal and variance reduction
degrades to 13% at the best β, compared to 63% at κ = 1.5.
7.2.3
Reward and Noise Model
At each step the agent receives
rt = ˆIc(st, at) + ϵt,
ϵt ∼N
 0, σ2(st, at)

,
(36)
where ˆIc is the surrogate model prediction. The state-dependent noise variance is
σ2(st, at) = σ2
0 + ηb · max
 0, δb −dmin(st)

+ ηa · max
 0, ∥at −at−1∥−δa

,
(37)
where σ2
0 is the baseline noise variance, dmin(st) is the normalised distance from st to the nearest
DHPS parameter bound, and δb, δa > 0 are boundary and action-volatility thresholds. The param-
eter values used are σ0 = 1.0, ηb = 8.0, δb = 0.4, and δa = 0.1; their selection is described below.
The boundary term activates when the operating point approaches within a normalised distance δb
of the DHPS parameter limits, reflecting the physical observation that operation near parameter
bounds introduces thermal transients that corrupt deposition quality. The action-volatility term
activates when the magnitude of consecutive control changes exceeds δa, penalising rapid heater
adjustments.
This noise structure is purely aleatoric, arising from inherent process variability
rather than from uncertainty about the model. The distinction between aleatoric and epistemic
uncertainty is examined in Section 7.3.4.
Threshold selection.
The boundary threshold δb = 0.4 corresponds to the outer 40% of the
normalised DHPS operating range, identified from the dataset as the region where Ic variability
increases markedly as the process approaches its physical limits. The action-volatility threshold
δa = 0.1 represents a normalised step change of 10% of the action range, below which consecutive
adjustments produce negligible thermal transients in the surrogate model. Both values were fixed
prior to any policy training and held constant across all experiments.
21


Table 2: VPAC-RS evaluation metrics at κ = 1.5, averaged over 10 seeds × 40 rollouts. SS IC std:
steady-state Ic standard deviation (steps 140–200). CVaR-10%: mean of worst 10% of episode
returns (higher is better). Best non-baseline entry per column in bold.
β
Mean Ic [A]
Ret mean
Ret std
SS IC std [A]
CVaR-10%
0.000 (baseline)
339.7
58.84
6.78
55.4
50.77
0.001
332.7
57.95
5.11
28.2
50.77
0.010
318.3
56.59
2.52
14.1
52.55
0.100
322.6
57.03
2.52
9.6
52.20
1.000
329.3
58.04
4.16
21.3
53.43
7.2.4
Training Protocol
All agents are trained for 500 episodes of up to 200 steps each, across 10 independent random seeds
per (method, β) combination. The 2D action space is discretised into 42 = 16 bins per dimension,
and tile-coded state features are used (10 tilings, 5 bins, 1,024 features). The variance penalty
coeﬀicient β is tuned independently per method over the grid {0.001, 0.01, 0.1, 1.0}. The selection
criterion is the largest episode-return standard-deviation reduction subject to a mean-return drop
of at most 5% relative to the β = 0 baseline. Per-method β tuning is necessary because β multiplies
quantities with different units and scales across estimators, so a common value would not represent
equal risk aversion across methods, as discussed in Section 6.1.
7.3
Results
Table 2 reports evaluation metrics for VPAC-RS across all β values at κ = 1.5. Each row summarises
400 greedy rollouts (40 per seed, 10 seeds) of the converged policy evaluated in the stochastic
environment.
The primary metrics are the episode return standard deviation (Ret std), which
directly reflects what the variance penalty acts on during training, and the steady-state Ic standard
deviation (SS IC std), measured over the last 30% of episode steps (steps 140–200) across rollouts.
CVaR-10% reports the mean of the worst 10% of episode returns; higher values indicate better
tail-risk performance.
7.3.1
VPAC-RS: Variance Reduction and Performance Trade-off
At β = 0.01, VPAC-RS achieves a steady-state Ic standard deviation of 14.1 A against 55.4 A for
the risk-neutral baseline, a 74% reduction. Episode return standard deviation falls from 6.78 to
2.52, a 63% reduction, confirming that the variance signal propagated through VPAC-RS during
training translates to lower variability in converged policy behaviour. CVaR-10% improves from
50.77 to 52.55, indicating that VPAC-RS also lifts the lower tail of the return distribution, reducing
the incidence of severely underperforming episodes.
The risk reduction comes at a cost in mean Ic: β = 0.01 yields 318.3 A versus 339.7 A for the
baseline, a drop of 21.4 A (6.3%). VPAC-RS has learned to operate in a lower-volatility region
of the DHPS parameter space, sacrificing some mean current to avoid the high-variance boundary
regions penalised by the noise model. The Pareto analysis in Section 7.3.3 supports practitioners
in selecting an operating point that reflects their specific yield and consistency requirements.
22


7.3.2
Beta Sensitivity
The relationship between β and variance reduction is non-monotonic. The sharpest improvement
occurs between β = 0.001 and β = 0.01: SS IC std falls from 28.2 A to 14.1 A. At β = 0.1,
SS IC std continues to fall (9.6 A) but Ret std plateaus at 2.52, while mean Ic partially recovers to
322.6 A. At β = 1.0, Ret std rises to 4.16 and SS IC std worsens to 21.3 A: the penalty dominates
the performance signal, causing the actor to converge toward a near-constant action policy that
achieves low per-step variance but poor long-horizon consistency.
This behaviour is consistent
with the over-conservatism effect identified in mean-variance RL literature [23, 13] and motivates
per-experiment β tuning.
7.3.3
Trajectory Analysis and Pareto Frontier
Figure 8 visualises the learned policy behaviour. Panel (A) shows that β = 0.01 achieves a sub-
stantially tighter IQR band than the baseline throughout the episode, with the gap widening in the
steady-state window (steps 140–200, shaded grey). Both policies start near the dataset maximum
(590 A, the physical upper bound of the surrogate model; this is not a tracking setpoint) because
episodes are initialised from high-Ic states in the dataset, and the declining trajectory reflects sur-
rogate dynamics under the feasible DHPS action range. Panel (B) confirms that the cross-rollout
Ic standard deviation at β = 0.01 collapses to near zero in the steady-state window (annotated:
14.1 A at step 185), while the baseline remains at 55.4 A. Panel (C) shows the episode return
distributions: the β = 0.01 boxplot is visibly tighter, with a smaller IQR and fewer outliers, while
β = 0 spans a wide range driven by high-noise episodes near the DHPS boundaries.








*$,) !-!*


	
	








-,!-'1$'.'
-! 2,--!
0$( )0
+%!-)+2 '!("+!! 2+)&&).-,
,!&$(!

-#!+/&.!,
	
 

Figure 8: Mean ± IQR of the Ic(A) trajectory across 400 greedy rollouts (10 seeds × 40 rollouts)
under the VPAC-RS policy at κ = 1.5. The solid green line is the risk-neutral baseline (β = 0);
the dashed blue line is the best risk-adjusted policy (β = 0.01); thin grey lines show the remaining
β values. The dashed horizontal line marks the dataset maximum (590 A), which is the physical
upper bound of the surrogate model and not a tracking setpoint. The shaded region indicates the
steady-state evaluation window (steps 140–200), over which SS IC std is computed. The β = 0.01
policy exhibits a markedly tighter IQR band throughout, with the separation widening in the
steady-state window (SS IC std: 14.1 A versus 55.4 A for the baseline).
Figure 9 plots mean Ic against Ret std for each β value. The Pareto frontier connects β = 0
(highest mean Ic, highest Ret std) and β = 0.01 (lowest Ret std), and β = 1.0 falls strictly inside
23


the frontier on both axes, confirming that over-penalisation is counter-productive with respect to
both objectives simultaneously.

	

	








%!" !' ))'




)*'%)$&+' ))'





"(#)*'%'&
Figure 9: Risk-return Pareto scatter for VPAC-RS at κ = 1.5. Each marker represents one β value
evaluated over 400 greedy rollouts; axes report mean Ic(A) across all rollout steps and episode
return standard deviation (Ret std). The starred marker identifies the best risk-adjusted policy
(β = 0.01, Ret std = 2.52, 63% below the baseline). The dashed line connects the Pareto-non-
dominated operating points. The β = 1.0 point falls inside the frontier on both axes, confirming
that over-penalisation degrades both objectives simultaneously.
7.3.4
Comparison with VPAC-BS
We evaluate VPAC-BS on the same HTS environment to determine whether the bootstrapping-
based estimator offers complementary variance reduction. The full VPAC-BS sweep across all β
values is provided in Table 4 (Appendix E).
At its best-β configuration (β = 0.1), VPAC-BS
achieves a 44% reduction in Ret std relative to its risk-neutral baseline, requiring a tenfold larger
penalty coeﬀicient than VPAC-RS to reach comparable risk reduction. At β = 0.01, VPAC-BS
Ret std increases above the baseline (5.55 versus 4.48), a result not observed for VPAC-RS at any
tested β, indicating that the bootstrapping estimator provides an unreliable variance signal at small
penalty values in this environment.
The performance difference is explained by the type of uncertainty each estimator targets.
VPAC-RS measures trajectory-level variability of the Q-iterate, directly tied to fluctuations in
24


cumulative reward caused by stochastic rewards. VPAC-BS measures cross-replicate disagreement
among Q-table predictions, targeting epistemic uncertainty about the Q-function arising from finite
training data. In the HTS environment the surrogate model is highly accurate (R2 = 0.9964), so the
dominant source of outcome variability is aleatoric: sensor noise, thermal transients, and boundary-
proximity effects encoded in the noise model. The VPAC-BS epistemic signal is correspondingly
weak relative to this aleatoric noise, and the estimator cannot reliably guide the actor toward
lower-variance behaviour at moderate β values. VPAC-RS is therefore the recommended estimator
for environments in which a reliable predictive model is available and aleatoric noise dominates.
Conversely, VPAC-BS is better suited to settings with sparse data or substantial model uncertainty,
consistent with the competitive VPAC-BS results in the puddle world experiments (Section 6).
Section 8 discusses this estimator-selection principle in the context of broader deployment guidance.
7.4
Discussion
The HTS case study establishes three findings that go beyond the puddle world experiments.
The first finding is that VPAC-RS scales to real industrial data without modification. The
tile-coded function approximation, two-timescale actor-critic updates, and rolling-sample variance
estimator all operate directly on real sensor features, without domain-specific reward shaping or
noise model knowledge. The 74% SS IC std reduction at β = 0.01 was achieved using the same
algorithm that reduced puddle world return variance by 83% in the tabular setting.
The second finding concerns the interpretation of the risk-return trade-off. The risk-neutral
baseline (β = 0) achieves a higher mean Ic (339.7 A) than the best VPAC-RS policy (318.3 A),
confirming that the variance reduction comes at a genuine cost in mean performance. This is ex-
pected behaviour for mean-variance optimisation and should not be interpreted as a failure of the
algorithm. Rather, it reflects the fundamental trade-off that the Pareto plot in Figure 9 makes ex-
plicit: practitioners select an operating point on the frontier based on their specific yield/consistency
requirements, and the appropriate β will vary across production lines and quality targets.
The third finding provides empirical support for a general principle about estimator selection.
The VPAC-RS versus VPAC-BS comparison on HTS, taken together with the competitive perfor-
mance of both estimators on the puddle world, suggests that the dominant uncertainty type in
the environment determines which estimator is more effective. Aleatoric-dominated environments
favour RS; epistemic-dominated environments favour BS. This principle is stated more precisely as
deployment guidance in Section 8.
8
Conclusion
This paper introduced a nonparametric variance-penalized framework for risk-sensitive reinforce-
ment learning that eliminates the variance critic of prior dual-critic methods by substituting statis-
tically grounded online estimators based on random scaling (VPAC-RS) and online bootstrapping
(VPAC-BS). Almost-sure convergence of both the Q-learning and actor-critic variants was estab-
lished via the ODE method, requiring only that the variance penalty remain bounded, a strictly
weaker condition than the consistency assumed by prior work. Empirically, VPAC-RS achieves
up to 83% reduction in steady-state return variance in the puddle world benchmark, matching or
exceeding the dual-critic VPAC baseline while adding zero learned parameters. In the HTS man-
ufacturing case study, the same algorithm reduces steady-state Ic variability by 74% and episode
return standard deviation by 63%, with the risk-return trade-off characterised explicitly by a Pareto
analysis across penalty coeﬀicients.
25


A practical finding across environments is that estimator choice should reflect the dominant
uncertainty type: VPAC-RS is better matched to environments with predominantly aleatoric noise,
while VPAC-BS is better suited to settings where epistemic uncertainty in the value function is the
primary source of policy instability.
Several directions remain open. Deriving finite-sample rates requires combining SA concen-
tration bounds [39, 40] with finite-sample approximation bounds for the present framework, a
combination that existing analyses do not address and that requires tools from the functional CLT
literature [18, 20]. Extending the framework to neural network function approximation, where boot-
strap ensembles and running parameter-space statistics provide natural analogues of the tabular
estimators, is a practical direction with direct implications for deep RL deployment in safety-critical
settings.
References
[1] A. Jain, G. Patil, A. Jain, K. Khetarpal, and D. Precup, “Variance penalized on-policy and off-
policy actor-critic,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 35,
no. 9, 2021, pp. 7899–7907.
[2] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G. Bellemare, A. Graves,
M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski et al., “Human-level control through deep rein-
forcement learning,” Nature, vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015.
[3] D. Silver, J. Schrittwieser, K. Simonyan, I. Antonoglou, A. Huang, A. Guez, T. Hubert,
L. Baker, M. Lai, A. Bolton et al., “Mastering the game of Go without human knowledge,”
Nature, vol. 550, no. 7676, pp. 354–359, 2017.
[4] S. Levine, C. Finn, T. Darrell, and P. Abbeel, “End-to-end training of deep visuomotor poli-
cies,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 17, no. 39, pp. 1–40, 2016.
[5] A. Tamar, D. Di Castro, and S. Mannor, “Policy gradient with variance related risk criteria,”
in International Conference on Machine Learning, 2012, pp. 935–942.
[6] M. Kuderer, S. Gulati, and W. Burgard, “Learning driving styles for autonomous vehicles
from demonstration,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 2641–2646.
[7] M. Komorowski, L. A. Celi, O. Badawi, A. C. Gordon, and A. A. Faisal, “The artificial
intelligence clinician learns optimal treatment strategies for sepsis in intensive care,” Nature
Medicine, vol. 24, no. 11, pp. 1716–1720, 2018.
[8] T. Wei, Y. Wang, and Q. Zhu, “Deep reinforcement learning for building HVAC control,” in
Proceedings of the 54th Annual Design Automation Conference (DAC), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[9] H. Markowitz, “Portfolio selection,” The Journal of Finance, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 77–91, 1952.
[10] M. J. Sobel, “The variance of discounted markov decision processes,” Journal of Applied Prob-
ability, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 794–802, 1982.
[11] D. J. White, “Mean, variance, and probabilistic criteria in finite markov decision processes:
a review,” J. Optim. Theory Appl., vol. 56, no. 1, p. 1–29, Jan. 1988. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00938524
26


[12] A. Tamar and S. Mannor, “Variance adjusted actor critic algorithms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1310.3697, 2013.
[13] L. Prashanth and M. Ghavamzadeh, “Variance-constrained actor-critic algorithms for dis-
counted and average reward mdps,” Machine Learning, vol. 105, pp. 367–417, 2016.
[14] H. Zhong, Y. C. Wu, and Z. Wang, “Risk-sensitive deep rl: Variance-constrained actor-critic
provably finds globally optimal policy,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2012.14098, 2023.
[15] C. Sherstan, D. R. Ashley, B. Bennett, K. Young, A. White, M. White, and R. S. Sutton,
“Comparing direct and indirect temporal-difference methods for estimating the variance of the
return,” in Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI), 2018.
[16] P. La and M. Ghavamzadeh, “Actor-critic algorithms for risk-sensitive mdps,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 26, 2013.
[17] X. Chen, J. D. Lee, X. T. Tong, and Y. Zhang, “Statistical inference for model parameters in
stochastic gradient descent,” 2020.
[18] C. Xie and Z. Zhang, “A statistical online inference approach in averaged stochastic approxi-
mation,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 8998–9009, 2022.
[19] P. Ramprasad, Y. Li, Z. Yang, Z. Wang, W. W. Sun, and G. Cheng, “Online bootstrap
inference for policy evaluation in reinforcement learning,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, vol. 118, no. 544, pp. 2901–2914, 2023.
[20] X. Li, J. Liang, and Z. Zhang, “Online statistical inference for nonlinear stochastic approxi-
mation with markovian data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07690, 2023.
[21] Y. Zhu and J. Dong, “On constructing confidence region for model parameters in stochastic
gradient descent via batch means,” in 2021 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC).
IEEE,
2021, pp. 1–12.
[22] V. S. Borkar, Stochastic Approximation: A Dynamical Systems Viewpoint.
Springer, 2008.
[23] J. García and F. Fernández, “A comprehensive survey on safe reinforcement learning,” Journal
of Machine Learning Research, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1437–1480, 2015.
[24] Y. Shen, M. J. Tobia, T. Sommer, and K. Obermayer, “Risk-sensitive reinforcement
learning,” Neural Computation, vol. 26, no. 7, p. 1298–1328, Jul. 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/NECO_a_00600
[25] R. A. Howard and J. E. Matheson, “Risk-sensitive Markov decision processes,” Management
Science, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 356–369, 1972.
[26] V. S. Borkar, “Q-Learning for risk-sensitive control,” Mathematics of Operations Research,
vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 294–311, 2002.
[27] ——, “Learning algorithms for risk-sensitive control,” 2010. [Online]. Available:
https:
//api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:5835100
[28] Y. Chow, M. Ghavamzadeh, L. Janson, and M. Pavone, “Risk-constrained reinforcement learn-
ing with percentile risk criteria,” Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 18, no. 167, pp.
1–51, 2018.
27


[29] A. Tamar, Y. Glassner, and S. Mannor, “Optimizing the CVaR via sampling,” in Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 29, no. 1, 2015.
[30] W. Dabney, M. Rowland, M. G. Bellemare, and R. Munos, “Distributional reinforcement
learning with quantile regression,” in AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 32,
no. 1, 2018.
[31] W. Dabney, G. Ostrovski, D. Silver, and R. Munos, “Implicit quantile networks for distri-
butional reinforcement learning,” in International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).
PMLR, 2018, pp. 1096–1105.
[32] A. Tamar, D. Di Castro, and S. Mannor, “Policy gradients with variance related risk criteria,”
in Proceedings of the 29th International Coference on International Conference on Machine
Learning, ser. ICML’12.
Madison, WI, USA: Omnipress, 2012, p. 1651–1658.
[33] L. Bisi, L. Sabbioni, E. Vittori, M. Papini, and M. Restelli, “Risk-averse trust region optimiza-
tion for reward-volatility reduction,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), 2020, pp. 4583–4589.
[34] T. Sangadi, L. A. Prashanth, and K. Jagannathan, “A finite-sample analysis of an actor-
critic algorithm for mean-variance optimization in a discounted MDP,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.07892, 2024.
[35] D. Liu, Q. Wei, D. Wang, X. Yang, and H. Li, Adaptive Dynamic Programming with Applica-
tions in Optimal Control, ser. Advances in Industrial Control.
Cham, Switzerland: Springer,
2017.
[36] S. Bhatnagar, R. S. Sutton, M. Ghavamzadeh, and M. Lee, “Natural actor-critic algorithms,”
Automatica, vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 2471–2482, 2009.
[37] V. R. Konda and J. N. Tsitsiklis, “On actor-critic algorithms,” SIAM Journal on Control and
Optimization, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1143–1166, 2003.
[38] S. Al-Dabooni and D. Wunsch, “The boundedness conditions for model-free HDP(λ),” IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 1928–1942, 2019.
[39] T. Xu, Z. Wang, and Y. Liang, “Improving sample complexity bounds for (natural) actor-critic
algorithms,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol. 33, 2020,
pp. 4358–4369.
[40] Y. Wu, W. Zhang, P. Xu, and Q. Gu, “A finite-time analysis of two time-scale actor-critic
methods,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol. 33, 2020,
pp. 17 617–17 628.
[41] M. G. Bellemare, W. Dabney, and R. Munos, “A distributional perspective on reinforcement
learning,” in International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).
PMLR, 2017, pp.
449–458.
[42] M. Zhu and T. Pan, “Distributional reinforcement learning for run-to-run control in semi-
conductor manufacturing processes,” Neural Computing and Applications, vol. 35, no. 26, pp.
19 337–19 350, 2023.
28


[43] S. K. Panda, R. Liu, and Y. Xiang, “Asymptotic analysis of sample-averaged Q-learning,”
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 2025.
[44] R. Nian, J. Liu, and B. Huang, “A review on reinforcement learning: Introduction and appli-
cations in industrial process control,” Computers & Chemical Engineering, vol. 139, p. 106886,
2020.
[45] T. Jaakkola, M. I. Jordan, and S. P. Singh, “Convergence of stochastic iterative dynamic
programming algorithms,” Neural Computation, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 1185–1201, 1994.
[46] J. N. Tsitsiklis, “Asynchronous stochastic approximation and q-learning,” Machine Learning,
vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 185–202, 1994.
[47] J. N. Tsitsiklis and B. Van Roy, “An analysis of temporal-difference learning with function
approximation,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 42, no. 5, pp. 674–690, 1997.
29


A
Hyperparameter Settings
Table 3 lists the full hyperparameter settings used across all puddle world experiments. Summary
statistics reported in the main paper are computed from unsmoothed rollouts of the converged
policy; smoothing coeﬀicients apply only to learning curve figures.
Table 3: Hyperparameters used across discrete and continuous puddle world settings. lrc: critic
learning rate. lra: actor learning rate. lrσ: variance critic learning rate (VPAC only).
Parameter
Discrete
Continuous
Common parameters
Discount γ
0.99
0.99
Max episodes
1,000
2,000
Max steps
500
5,000
Seeds
10
10
Smoothing (αsmooth, returns)
0.03
0.03
Smoothing (αsmooth, variance)
0.05
0.05
AC (baseline, β = 0)
lrc / lra
0.1 / 0.01
0.05 / 0.01
VPAC [1]
β
0.002
0.005
lrc / lra / lrσ
0.1 / 0.01 / 0.1
0.05 / 0.01 / 0.025
VPAC-RS (proposed)
β
0.01
0.005
lrc / lra
0.1 / 0.01
0.05 / 0.01
Variance update frequency
20 steps
20 steps
Warm-up episodes
5
5
VPAC-BS (proposed)
β
0.005
0.005
lrc / lra
0.1 / 0.01
0.05 / 0.01
Ensemble size K
10
10
Variance update frequency
20 steps
20 steps
Continuous setting only
Tile coding
–
10 tilings, 5 bins
Feature dimension
–
1,024
B
Proof of Theorem 1
We prove almost-sure convergence of the variance-penalized Q-learning iterates to Q∗, the unique
fixed point of the penalized Bellman operator K, by verifying the stochastic approximation condi-
tions of Borkar’s Theorem 2.2 [22]. Since the update modifies only the visited state-action pair at
each iteration, the recursion is an asynchronous stochastic approximation; we invoke the standard
reduction of asynchronous updates with positive asymptotic visitation frequency to the synchronous
framework (Jaakkola et al. [45]; see also Tsitsiklis [46] and Chapter 7 of Borkar [22]).
30


Step 1: SA Recursion in Standard Form
We write the Q-learning update as
Qt+1(s, a) = Qt(s, a) + ∆t(s, a),
∆t(s, a) = αt 1[(s, a) = (St, At)]
×

h(Qt)(s, a) + Mt+1(s, a)

,
(38)
where the mean-field function is
h(Q)(s, a) = (KQ)(s, a) −Q(s, a),
(39)
and the noise term at the visited state-action pair is
Mt+1(s, a) =





Rt+1 + γ max
π
F π
Qt(St+1)
−(KQt)(s, a),
(s, a) = (St, At),
0,
otherwise.
(40)
Under Assumption 1, the fixed exploration policy πb induces a stationary distribution µπb with
µπb(s, a) > 0 for every (s, a), so that
1
t
t−1
X
k=0
1[(Sk, Ak) = (s, a)] −→µπb(s, a) > 0
a.s.
(41)
Each state-action pair is therefore updated with positive asymptotic frequency, which is the condi-
tion required for the induced per-coordinate asynchronous step sizes to inherit the Robbins-Monro
conditions from {αt}.
Step 2: γ-Contraction of K
We show ∥KQ1 −KQ2∥∞≤γ∥Q1 −Q2∥∞for any Q1, Q2. For any state s′, define for i = 1, 2:
F π
Qi(s′) =
X
a′
π(a′|s′)

Qi(s′, a′) −β ˆσclip(s′, a′)

,
(42)
where ˆσclip is treated as a fixed bounded state-action penalty inside the Bellman operator K for
the purposes of this contraction argument, and is the same in both F π
Q1 and F π
Q2.
Let π∗
1 =
arg maxπ F π
Q1(s′). Since π∗
2 = arg maxπ F π
Q2(s′) maximises F π
Q2, we have F π∗
2
Q2(s′) ≥F π∗
1
Q2(s′), and
therefore:
max
π
F π
Q1(s′) −max
π
F π
Q2(s′) = F π∗
1
Q1(s′) −F π∗
2
Q2(s′)
≤F π∗
1
Q1(s′) −F π∗
1
Q2(s′)
=
X
a′
π∗
1(a′|s′)
×
 Q1(s′, a′) −Q2(s′, a′)

≤∥Q1 −Q2∥∞,
(43)
where the last equality uses the fact that ˆσclip cancels in the difference F π∗
1
Q1 −F π∗
1
Q2, since both terms
use the same fixed penalty. By the symmetric argument with π∗
2:
max
π
F π
Q2(s′) −max
π
F π
Q1(s′) ≤∥Q1 −Q2∥∞.
(44)
31


Combining (43) and (44):
max
π
F π
Q1(s′) −max
π
F π
Q2(s′)
 ≤∥Q1 −Q2∥∞.
(45)
Taking expectations over S′ conditional on (s, a) and then taking the supremum over (s, a) gives
∥(KQ1) −(KQ2)∥∞≤γ∥Q1 −Q2∥∞.
(46)
Since γ < 1, K is a γ-contraction in ∥· ∥∞. By Banach’s fixed-point theorem, K has a unique
fixed point Q∗, satisfying ∥Q∗∥∞≤(Rmax + γβcmax)/(1 −γ), and h(Q) = KQ −Q satisfies
∥h(Q1) −h(Q2)∥∞≤(1 + γ)∥Q1 −Q2∥∞(Lipschitz condition, Borkar’s Assumption A1).
Step 3: Martingale Difference Noise
For the visited coordinate (St, At), the noise in (40) satisfies
E[Mt+1(St, At) | Ft] = 0
(47)
by definition of (KQt)(St, At) as the conditional expectation of Rt+1 + γ maxπ F π
Qt(St+1) given
(St, At). For the conditional second moment, note that |Rt+1| ≤Rmax almost surely (Assumption 2)
and
max
π
F π
Qt(s′)
 ≤∥Qt∥∞+ βcmax
(48)
by Assumption 3 and the fact that | P
a′ π(a′|s′)Qt(s′, a′)| ≤∥Qt∥∞. Therefore
E

M2
t+1(St, At) | Ft

≤C
 1 + ∥Qt∥2
∞

(49)
for a constant C > 0 depending only on Rmax, γ, β, and cmax (Borkar’s Assumption A3).
Step 4: Step-Size and Bounded-Iterate Conditions
Assumption 4 supplies the Robbins-Monro conditions for the base step-size sequence {αt}, while
Step 1 shows that the induced per-coordinate asynchronous step sizes inherit these conditions
under positive asymptotic visitation frequency (Borkar’s Assumption A2). Assumption 5 supplies
almost-sure boundedness of {Qt} (Borkar’s Assumption A4).
Step 5: Global Asymptotic Stability of the ODE
The limiting ODE is ˙Q(t) = h(Q(t)) = KQ(t) −Q(t). Since KQ∗= Q∗, the error e(t) = Q(t) −Q∗
satisfies ˙e(t) = KQ(t) −KQ∗−e(t). Let V (t) = ∥e(t)∥∞and define the active set
I(t) =

(s, a) : |e(t)(s, a)| = V (t)
	
.
(50)
For V (t) > 0, the upper right Dini derivative satisfies
D+V (t) ≤
max
(s,a)∈I(t) sgn(e(t)(s, a)) ˙e(t)(s, a)
=
max
(s,a)∈I(t) sgn(e(t)(s, a))
h
(KQ(t))(s, a) −(KQ∗)(s, a) −e(t)(s, a)
i
≤
max
(s,a)∈I(t)
(KQ(t))(s, a) −(KQ∗)(s, a)
 −V (t)
≤γ∥Q(t) −Q∗∥∞−V (t)
= −(1 −γ)V (t).
(51)
32


When V (t) = 0, the inequality holds trivially. Therefore, by the comparison principle for upper
right Dini derivatives,
V (t) ≤e−(1−γ)tV (0),
(52)
so Q(t) →Q∗exponentially as t →∞, establishing global asymptotic stability of the limiting ODE
(Borkar’s Assumption A5).
All conditions of Borkar’s Theorem 2.2 are satisfied. Therefore Qt →Q∗almost surely.
□
Remark 4. The contraction argument in Step 2 holds for any bounded ˆσclip, regardless of whether
it converges to the true σπ. The key algebraic fact is that ˆσclip cancels in F π∗
1
Q1 −F π∗
1
Q2, since both
use the same estimator. This is why boundedness is the only requirement on the variance estimate:
the fixed point Q∗exists and is unique for any bounded ˆσclip, and the operator K is a γ-contraction
irrespective of the estimator’s accuracy.
C
Proof of Theorem 2
We prove convergence of the two-timescale actor-critic using Borkar’s Theorem 2 of Chapter 6 [22],
which gives conditions under which a two-timescale SA scheme converges: the faster-timescale
iterate tracks a unique stable equilibrium that depends continuously on the slower-timescale iterate,
and the slower-timescale iterate then has its limit set contained in the stationary set of the ODE
induced by evaluating the equilibrium map at the current slower iterate.
The on-policy case (ρt ≡1) is treated here; the off-policy extension is given in Appendix D.
Throughout, we assume bounded features ∥ϕ(s, a)∥≤ϕmax and a bounded, Lipschitz policy score
on the relevant compact parameter set, in addition to Assumptions 1–6.
Step 1: Two-Timescale SA Form
Write the critic update as
wt+1 = wt + αw,t

hw(wt, θt) + Mw
t+1

,
(53)
where the critic mean field is
hw(w, θ) = Eµπθ
h Rt+1 + γF(St+1) −Qw(St, At)

× ∇wQw(St, At)
i
.
(54)
with F(s′) = P
a′ πθ(a′|s′)[Qw(s′, a′) −βˆσclip(s′, a′)], and the critic noise, centered at its stationary
mean field, is
Mw
t+1 =
 Rt+1 + γF(St+1) −Qw(St, At)

∇wQw(St, At)
−hw(wt, θt).
(55)
Write the actor update as
θt+1 = θt + αθ,t

g(θt, wt) + Mθ
t+1

,
(56)
where the actor mean field is
g(θ, w) = Eµπθ
 ˆQvar(St, At) ∇θ log πθ(At|St)

,
ˆQvar(s, a) = Qw(s, a) −βˆσclip(s, a).
(57)
33


and the actor noise, centered at its stationary mean field, is
Mθ
t+1 = ˆQvar(St, At)∇θ log πθ(At|St) −g(θt, wt).
(58)
Because (St, At) is generated by a Markov chain rather than i.i.d. sampling from µπθ at every step,
Mw
t+1 and Mθ
t+1 are not literal martingale differences with respect to the full filtration Ft; instead
they satisfy the bounded controlled Markov noise conditions of Borkar’s two-timescale framework
(Chapter 6, Section 6.2 of [22]), which requires only that the noise, averaged over the mixing time
of the chain, vanish asymptotically relative to the step size, together with the conditional second-
moment growth bound verified in Step 2 and Step 4 below. This is the standard treatment for
actor-critic recursions built on a single Markovian trajectory [36, 37].
Step 2: Faster-Timescale Analysis (Critic Convergence to w∗(θ))
For a quasi-static actor parameter θ, the critic recursion (53) tracks the ODE
˙w(t) = hw(w(t), θ).
(59)
Linear FA mean field.
Under linear function approximation Qw(s, a) = w⊤ϕ(s, a), the TD
target becomes yt = Rt+1 + γ(w⊤Φ(St+1, πθ) −βB(St+1, πθ)), where Φ(s′, π) = P
a′ π(a′|s′)ϕ(s′, a′)
and B(s′, π) = P
a′ π(a′|s′)ˆσclip(s′, a′). The mean field is
hw(w, θ) = bvar(θ) −G(θ)w,
G(θ) = A(θ) −γC(θ),
(60)
where
A(θ) = Eµπθ [ϕ(s, a)ϕ(s, a)⊤],
(61)
C(θ) = Eµπθ [ϕ(s, a)Φ(S′, πθ)⊤],
(62)
bvar(θ) = Eµπθ

(R −γβB(S′, πθ))ϕ(s, a)

.
(63)
Positive definiteness. G(θ) = A(θ) −γC(θ) is identical in structure to the standard on-policy
linear TD system matrix, for which positive definiteness under Assumption 1 and non-degenerate
features is established in Tsitsiklis and Van Roy [47].
The variance penalty modifies only bvar
(a vector), not G(θ), so positive definiteness is preserved. We assume G(θ) is uniformly positive
definite over the compact parameter set, consistent with the standard linear TD stability condition.
Unique stable equilibrium. Since G(θ) is positive definite, the ODE (59) is globally exponentially
stable with unique equilibrium
w∗(θ) = G(θ)−1bvar(θ).
(64)
The noise Mw
t+1 in (55) has zero mean under µπθ and bounded conditional second moment, since
Rt+1, ∇wQw = ϕ, Qw, and ˆσclip are all bounded under Assumptions 2, 3, and 5, together with the
assumed feature boundedness. By Borkar’s Theorem 2.2 (extended to controlled Markov noise as
discussed in Step 1), wt →w∗(θ) almost surely for each fixed θ.
Step 3: Continuity of θ 7→w∗(θ)
From (64), w∗(θ) is continuous in θ provided A(θ), C(θ), and bvar(θ) are continuous in θ and G(θ)
is uniformly invertible. The matrices A and C are computed as expectations under the stationary
distribution µπθ. Under Assumption 6, πθ(a|s) is differentiable (hence continuous) in θ for all (s, a),
and by the ergodicity of the Markov chain (Assumption 1), the stationary distribution µπθ varies
continuously with θ under smooth policy parameterizations (see, e.g., Section 2 of Bhatnagar et
al. [36]). Continuity of A(θ), C(θ), and bvar(θ) follows. Uniform invertibility of G(θ) holds because
positive definiteness is preserved uniformly over compact parameter sets under non-degenerate,
bounded features. Hence θ 7→w∗(θ) is continuous.
34


Step 4: Slower-Timescale Analysis (Actor Convergence)
On the actor’s timescale, the critic is at equilibrium w∗(θt) (Step 2). The actor recursion (56)
therefore approximately tracks the ODE
˙θ(t) = g
 θ(t), w∗(θ(t))

= Eµπθ(t)
h
ˆQvar(s, a; θ(t))∇θ log πθ(t)(a|s)
i
.
(65)
where ˆQvar(s, a; θ) = Qw∗(θ)(s, a)−βˆσclip(s, a), with ˆσclip treated as a fixed bounded penalty within
this mean-field evaluation, consistent with the quasi-static convention used throughout this proof.
By the policy gradient theorem applied to the variance-penalized objective Jvar(θ), the right-
hand side of (65) equals ∇θJvar(θ). Thus the actor ODE is the gradient ascent flow of Jvar(θ), and
its equilibria satisfy ∇θJvar(θ∗) = 0.
Lipschitz drift. The drift g(θ, w∗(θ)) is Lipschitz in θ on the compact parameter set: the score
function ∇θ log πθ(a|s) is bounded and Lipschitz by Assumption 6 and the standing boundedness
assumption of this appendix; ˆQvar is bounded by ∥Qw∗(θ)∥∞+ βcmax, which is bounded over com-
pact θ sets given bounded features and the continuity of w∗(θ); and w∗(θ) is Lipschitz in θ (it is
continuously differentiable by the implicit function theorem applied to (64)).
Noise conditions. The actor noise Mθ
t+1 in (58) is centered at its mean field under µπθt, and
by the same controlled Markov noise argument as Step 1, satisfies the conditional second-moment
bound E[∥Mθ
t+1∥2 | Ft] ≤C′(1 + ∥θt∥2), because the score function and ˆQvar are bounded under
Assumptions 3 and 6 together with the standing boundedness assumption.
ODE trajectories.
Boundedness of the actor iterates is supplied directly by Assumption 5;
equivalently, the actor update may be viewed as a projected stochastic approximation on a compact
parameter set. Hence the trajectories of the actor ODE (65) remain in this compact set.
Conclusion
The following conditions of Borkar’s two-timescale Theorem 2 (Chapter 6 of [22]) are satisfied:
(i) The critic ODE has a unique globally stable equilibrium w∗(θ) for each fixed θ (Step 2).
(ii) The map θ 7→w∗(θ) is continuous (Step 3).
(iii) The actor mean field g(θ, w∗(θ)) = ∇θJvar(θ) is Lipschitz (Step 4).
(iv) Both noise sequences satisfy the bounded controlled Markov noise conditions with bounded
conditional second moments (Steps 1, 2, and 4).
(v) The step-size separation αθ,t/αw,t →0 holds by Assumption 4.
(vi) Iterates are bounded by Assumption 5.
Therefore wt −w∗(θt) →0 almost surely, and the limit set of {θt} is almost surely contained in
the set of stationary points of Jvar, i.e., every limit point θ∗of {θt} satisfies ∇θJvar(θ∗) = 0. If
the stationary points of Jvar are isolated, this limit set is almost surely a single point, and θt →θ∗
almost surely.
□
35


D
Off-Policy Convergence
The off-policy actor-critic modifies the on-policy analysis by replacing stationary averages under
µπθ with behavior-distribution averages under µb and by introducing importance weights ρt =
πθ(At|St)/b(At|St).
Assumption 7 (Off-Policy Coverage and Clipped Importance Weights). The behavior policy b has
support over the target policy class: if πθ(a|s) > 0, then b(a|s) > 0. The importance weights are
clipped so that 0 ≤ρt ≤ρmax < ∞for all t.
Assumption 8 (Off-Policy Critic Stability). The off-policy projected TD system matrix Gb(θ) =
Ab(θ) −γCb(θ), computed under the behavior distribution µb, is uniformly positive definite on the
compact parameter set.
Under Assumptions 7 and 8, the actor mean field becomes
goﬀ(θ, w) = Eµb

ρ(s, a) ˆQvar(s, a)∇θ log πθ(a|s)

,
(66)
where ˆQvar(s, a) = Qw(s, a) −βˆσclip(s, a) (following the off-policy policy gradient of Theorem 4 in
Jain et al. [1]). The corresponding actor noise is
Mθ
t+1 = ρt ˆQvar(St, At) ∇θ log πθ(At|St) −goﬀ(θt, wt).
(67)
Because the data are generated by the behavior Markov chain, this noise is centered at its mean field
under µb but is not a literal martingale difference with respect to the full filtration; it satisfies the
controlled Markov noise conditions of Borkar’s framework, as in the on-policy case (Appendix C).
The clipped ratio ρt ≤ρmax, together with bounded scores, bounded critic features, bounded
iterates, and bounded ˆσclip, gives the required conditional second-moment bound:
E

∥Mθ
t+1∥2 | Ft

≤ρ2
max C′(1 + ∥θt∥2).
(68)
The critic analysis is analogous to Steps 2 and 3 of Appendix C, with all expectations taken
under µb in place of µπθ, provided Assumption 8 holds; this positive definiteness is not automatically
implied by coverage or ergodicity alone and is stated as a separate standing condition.
Under
this assumption, the critic tracks the off-policy equilibrium w∗
b(θ), and the actor tracks the off-
policy ODE ˙θ = goﬀ(θ, w∗
b(θ)). Consequently, the limit set of {θt} is almost surely contained in
the stationary set of the off-policy actor ODE. If the stationary points of the induced off-policy
objective Jd0(θ) are isolated, then θt converges almost surely to a stationary point θ∗.
□
Remark 5. As in the on-policy case, the off-policy proof requires only that ˆσclip be bounded, not
consistent. The importance sampling correction ρt modifies the actor mean field and noise but does
not affect the contraction of the penalized Bellman operator, which is established independently of
ρt in Appendix B. The off-policy critic, unlike its on-policy counterpart, requires Assumption 8 as
an additional stability condition, reflecting the well-known sensitivity of off-policy linear TD to the
choice of behavior policy [47].
E
Full VPAC-BS HTS Evaluation
Table 4 reports VPAC-BS evaluation metrics across all β values at κ = 1.5, averaged over 10
seeds × 40 greedy rollouts. The best risk-adjusted result (β = 0.1, shown in bold) achieves 44%
36


Table 4: VPAC-BS evaluation metrics at κ = 1.5, averaged over 10 seeds × 40 rollouts. SS IC std:
steady-state Ic standard deviation (steps 140–200). CVaR-10%: mean of worst 10% of episode
returns (higher is better). Best non-baseline entry per column in bold.
β
Mean Ic [A]
Ret mean
Ret std
SS IC std [A]
CVaR-10%
0.000 (baseline)
338.3
59.06
4.48
–
51.27
0.001
331.3
57.97
4.58
–
52.32
0.010
340.7
59.78
5.55
–
50.18
0.100
320.5
56.74
2.52
9.6
51.76
1.000
332.0
58.62
4.13
–
52.93
Ret std reduction relative to the within-run baseline. The irregular pattern at β = 0.01 (Ret std
exceeds the baseline) is discussed in Section 7.3.4 and attributed to the mismatch between the
bootstrapping estimator’s epistemic signal and the predominantly aleatoric noise structure of the
HTS environment.
Figures 10 and 11 show the trajectory and Pareto evaluation for VPAC-BS, analogous to Fig-
ures 8 and 9 for VPAC-RS. Figures 12 and 13 provide the rolling IC std and episode return
distributions for both methods.








*$,) !-!*


	
	








-,!-'1$'.'
-! 2,--!
0$( )0
+%!-)+2 '!("+!! 2+)&&).-,
,!&$(!

-#!+/&.!,
	
 
Figure 10: Mean ± IQR of the Ic(A) trajectory across 400 greedy rollouts under the VPAC-BS
policy at κ = 1.5. The solid green line is the risk-neutral baseline (β = 0); the dashed blue line
is the best risk-adjusted policy (β = 0.1). The β = 0.1 IQR band is wider than the baseline in
the transient phase (steps 50–130) before narrowing in the steady-state window, indicating that
VPAC-BS achieves variance reduction primarily in the settled phase of the episode rather than
throughout.
F
HTS Training Curves
Figure 14 shows the training return and variance curves for VPAC-RS at κ = 1.5 across all β values.
These curves reflect the evolution of the variance estimator signal during training, evaluated on
stochastic rollouts of the target policy every 15 episodes for returns and every 30 episodes for
variance. The variance values are computed on normalised discounted returns (reward divided by
590 at each step) and are therefore on a different absolute scale from the evaluation Ret std reported
37



	

		

	

	





	








&"#!"( **(
	








*+(&*%',( **(





#)$*+(&('  
Figure 11: Risk-return Pareto scatter for VPAC-BS at κ = 1.5. Axes and marker conventions follow
Figure 9. The starred marker identifies the best risk-adjusted policy (β = 0.1, Ret std = 2.52, 44%
below the baseline). Four operating points are Pareto-non-dominated; the β = 0.01 point is non-
dominated on the mean Ic axis (highest mean Ic of all configurations) despite exhibiting the highest
Ret std, reflecting the irregular variance signal produced by the bootstrapping estimator at small
penalty values in this environment.
38













% '$ (%


	


 ( &$'' $!!$)('  
(,'((
+ #$+


	
	
  $!! #  (  !$+&  "$& $#' '(#( %$! ,
 '! #




 '! #












 '$)#( % '$ ()&#
  % '$ ()&#  '(& )( $#  ( (&  !$+& *& #
	
 

Figure 12: Supporting evaluation panels for VPAC-RS at κ = 1.5 (400 greedy rollouts, stochastic
environment). (B) Rolling Ic(A) standard deviation across rollouts at each episode step, smoothed
with a uniform window of 15 steps. Annotated values show the mean steady-state IC std (steps
140–200) for β = 0 (55.4 A) and β = 0.01 (14.1 A). The shaded region is the steady-state evaluation
window. (C) Episode return distributions across all rollouts; boxes span the interquartile range,
with the median as the horizontal bar and whiskers extending to 1.5 times the IQR. The β = 0.01
and β = 0.1 policies produce the tightest return distributions, consistent with the Ret std values
in Table 2.











&!(% )&




	




 ) '%(( %""%*)(  
)-())
,!$%,
	

  %""!$  )  "%,'  #%' %$(!()$) &%"!-
 ("!$




 ("!$



















!(%*$) &!(% )*'$
  &!(% )*'$ !()'!*)!%$  )! )'  "%,' +'!$
	
 
Figure 13: Supporting evaluation panels for VPAC-BS at κ = 1.5 (400 greedy rollouts, stochastic
environment). Panel and axis conventions follow Figure 12. (B) The β = 0.01 curve substantially
exceeds the baseline IC std throughout the episode, confirming the pathological result reported in
Table 4. The β = 0.1 policy reaches near-zero IC std in the steady-state window (annotated: 9.6 A).
(C) Episode return distributions are wider and less ordered across β values than for VPAC-RS (cf.
Figure 12C), consistent with the weaker and less consistent variance-reduction signal produced by
the bootstrapping estimator in this environment.
in Table 2. Despite this scale difference, the relative ordering of β values is qualitatively consistent
between training and evaluation: lower β values that achieve smaller Ret std at evaluation also tend
to exhibit lower training variance in the latter half of training. The y-axis of the variance panel is
truncated to highlight relative ordering; the absolute range is 1.45–1.90 in normalised return units.
39







	
!!
		



	

	

	



	

	
"# 
$  "# ! $   
β  
β  
β  
β  
β  





!!
	
	
		



	

	

	
  ! !#"  "# 
   "# ! $   
β  
β  
β  
β  
β  
Figure 14: Training curves for VPAC-RS at κ = 1.5 (10 seeds; error bars show ±1 standard error
of the mean, plotted at sampled intervals for clarity). Left: mean episode return over training.
All β values converge to comparable return levels, confirming that variance penalisation does not
significantly degrade mean performance during learning. Right: variance of normalised discounted
returns estimated during training. The y-axis is truncated to show relative ordering across β values;
absolute variance range is 1.45–1.90.





	
!!
	












"# 
$  "# ! $   
β  
β  
β  
β  
β  





!!
	




  ! !#"  "# 
   "# ! $   
β  
β  
β  
β  
β  
Figure 15: Training curves for VPAC-BS at κ = 1.5 (10 seeds; error bars show ±1 standard error
of the mean, plotted at sampled intervals for clarity). Left: mean episode return over training. All
β values converge to comparable return levels. Right: variance of normalised discounted returns
estimated during training. Notably, β = 0.01 (green) sits above the risk-neutral baseline (β = 0,
blue) throughout training, consistent with the pathological evaluation result for this configuration
(Table 4), and in contrast to VPAC-RS where β = 0.01 produces the lowest training variance
(Figure 14). The y-axis is truncated to show relative ordering; absolute variance range is 1.45–1.90.
40
