ResSafe: Learning Safety Filtering with Residual
Reinforcement Learning for Humanoids
Gechen Qu1
Tong Zhang1
Bike Zhang1
Yen-Jen Wang1
Koushil Sreenath1,†
Claire Tomlin1,†
Jason Jangho Choi2,†
1University of California, Berkeley
2University of California, Los Angeles
Figure 1: Humanoid balance tasks under various payloads. We introduce ResSafe, a performance-safety
decoupling framework based on residual reinforcement learning which learns safety filtering. (a)-(d) Successful
experiments of balance motions under our policy. (e) Failure case of the baseline policy. See more details in
Section 5.3 and Table 3.
Abstract: Safe control of humanoid robots remains challenging due to their high-
dimensional dynamics, contact-rich interactions, and sensitivity to disturbances.
Although reinforcement learning has enabled effective locomotion and motion
tracking, learned policies can still generate unsafe actions that lead to instability
or falls. In this work, we propose residual reinforcement learning as an implicit
safety-filtering mechanism for safe humanoid control. Instead of relying on a sin-
gle nominal policy to simultaneously balance performance, safety, and robustness,
we decouple performance and safety. The nominal policy focuses solely on task
performance, while a residual policy learns safety corrections. This decoupling
leads to a better performance–safety Pareto trade-off and avoids the need for care-
ful tuning of multiple competing reward terms within a single policy training. We
show that the residual policy can act as an implicit safety filter. We evaluate our
method in challenging humanoid balance tasks. Compared with the nominal ref-
erence policy and a learning-based safety filter baseline, residual reinforcement
learning improves safety while still achieving competent performance.
Keywords: Humanoid Whole-body Control, Safety, Residual Reinforcement
Learning, Safe Reinforcement Learning, Safety Filter
†Equal advising.
Correspondence: qugch@berkeley.edu. Website: sciautonomy.github.io/ResSafe Web
arXiv:2609.15988v1  [cs.RO]  14 Sep 2026


1
Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) for humanoid control inherently involves a multi-objective optimiza-
tion problem, where nominal performance (e.g., agility or motion tracking) must be balanced against
safety and robustness [1, 2]. As illustrated in Fig. 2.(a), these objectives are often in conflict, leading
to a Pareto trade-off. In practice, however, RL algorithms rely on gradient-based optimization and
typically converge to locally optimal solutions, often resulting in a suboptimal Pareto frontier. Con-
sequently, in current RL frameworks, improving robustness or safety, e.g., through increased domain
randomization or stronger penalties for failures, inevitably comes at the expense of degraded perfor-
mance. This limitation is also present in classical safe RL based on constrained Markov Decision
Process (MDP) [3, 4], where safety and performance are coupled through the Lagrangian.
In this work, we show that by decoupling the learning of performance and safety, we can signif-
icantly improve the achievable performance–safety Pareto frontier of humanoid motion policies.
This decoupling is inspired by human motor intelligence: when learning a new sport, humans do
not relearn safety—such as maintaining balance and avoiding collisions—from scratch, but instead
rely on reflexive motor skills developed through years of growth and interaction with the physical
world. Motivated by this observation, our objective is to develop a generalizable safety filtering
policy for humanoids that transfers across tasks without requiring retraining for safety from scratch.
As an initial step toward this goal, we propose a framework that explicitly decouples the learning of
performance and safety during training.
To instantiate this idea, we propose a residual reinforcement learning framework that separates nom-
inal task optimization from safety correction. We first train a nominal motion policy optimized for
task performance and then keep it fixed while training a residual safety policy. The final action is
obtained by augmenting the nominal action with a learned safety residual correction (Fig. 2.(b)).
Overall, our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose ResSafe, a performance–safety decoupling framework for learning-based safety
filtering and RL-based humanoid control, where a reference policy optimizes task performance
and a separate residual policy learns safety corrections.
• We connect residual RL with control-theoretic safety filtering by showing that the learned resid-
ual policy behaves similarly to a min-norm safety filter correction, providing an implicit safety
filtering mechanism without online optimization.
• We empirically demonstrate that the proposed decoupled learning framework achieves a supe-
rior performance–safety–robustness trade-off compared to single-policy training frameworks for
humanoid extreme-balance tasks. We validate this framework in both simulation and hardware
under random payloads, demonstrating improved robustness with small degradation in tracking
performance, as well as generalization across different reference policy checkpoints.
2
Related Works
Safe Control Theory and Safety Filters. In classical safe control, safety is formulated as a state-
constraint satisfaction problem, where the objective is to maintain the system within a control-
invariant subset of the constraint set [7]. Hamilton–Jacobi (HJ) reachability [8] and control barrier
functions (CBFs) [5] address this problem through safety certificates that characterize the invariant
set and safe control actions. These certificates can further be used to monitor and modify potentially
unsafe reference actions through a safety filter [9, 10]. However, existing safety methods typically
rely on explicit dynamics models and suffer from poor scalability with state dimension, limiting their
applicability to systems with high-dimensional and complex dynamics such as humanoid robots.
Safe Reinforcement Learning. Various safe RL algorithms proposed in [3, 4, 11–15] construe
safety violations as an accumulation of safety-relevant cost, referred to as the constrained MDP
problem [16]. Although such a formulation is applicable in certain safety settings, it does not ad-
equately capture instantaneous constraint violations such as collisions or falls. Other formulations
rooted in safe control theory are proposed, for example, Lyapunov theory in [17, 18], and CBFs
2


safe control
unfiltered ctrl
(implicit)
safety
constraint
𝝅𝐬𝐚𝐟𝐞𝒐𝒕
= 𝝅𝐫𝐞𝐟𝒐𝒕 + 𝚫𝝅𝜽(𝒐𝒕,𝝅𝐫𝐞𝐟 𝒐𝒕)
𝝅𝐫𝐞𝐟(𝒐𝒕)
𝝅𝐬𝐚𝐟𝐞(𝒐𝒕)
(potentially)
unsafe
𝚫𝝅𝜽
Reference Policy 𝜋!"# 
(motion tracking policy)
Safety Filtering Policy 
𝚫𝝅𝜽(𝒐𝒕, 𝝅𝐫𝐞𝐟 𝒐𝒕)
𝝅𝐫𝐞𝐟(𝒐𝒕)
domain
rand.
easy
difficult
motion
env.
(i) Training Distribution
(ii) Reward
(c) Offline Training
Task 
performance
Robustness
Safety
(a) Objective
Robustness
Safety
(b) Framework
Residual RL
sim & real
Task 
performance
unsafe
safe
ref. policy
Action
Set
survival time
(reachability)
min-norm objective
(filtering)
+
Figure 2: ResSafe Overview. (a) By decoupling the learning of performance and safety, we aim to achieve
a better performance–safety Pareto frontier. (b) To achieve this, we propose a residual RL-based architecture
in which the residual RL policy learns a safety correction, resembling the structure of safety filters [5, 6]. (c)
We train the residual RL safety filtering policy primarily through a maximum-survival-time reachability for-
mulation. To improve generalization across various reference actions, we expose the residual RL policy during
training to varying levels of reference motion difficulty, reference policy safety, and domain randomization.
and HJ reachability in [19–28]. However, these approaches rely on specialized reachability-type
Bellman equations, distinct from Bellman equations for typical sum-over-time rewards.
Safety and Extreme Balance for Humanoids. Various works are proposed to ensure or improve
the safety of humanoids [24, 29–33], or locomotion more broadly [34–38]. However, the majority
focuses on collision avoidance and stable walking, often using CBFs synthesized from simplified
models, with relatively limited attention devoted to whole-body balance as a safety constraint [33,
38]. The works in [2, 39] leverage refined motion datasets to achieve challenging balance motions;
however, safety is handled through carefully hand-designed and tuned reward terms within a single-
policy training framework.
Residual Reinforcement Learning. Residual RL combines prior controllers with learned residual
policies, allowing robots to retain structured control knowledge while compensating for modeling
errors, disturbances, and task-specific discrepancies [40]. Recent works have extended this paradigm
to various robotic systems, including dexterous manipulation [41], [42], quadcopter flight [43], [44],
and humanoid whole-body control [45].
3
Background & Problem Formulation
Constrained Optimal Control Problem & Safety Filter. We begin with a safety-constrained op-
timal control problem for a general nonlinear dynamical system and introduce the safety-filtering
framework used to achieve performance–safety decoupling. Consider a trajectory x(·) of a dynami-
cal system, governed by
˙x(t) = f(x(t), u(t)) for t ≥0, x(0) = x,
(1)
where x ∈Rn is the initial state and u is a control input signal in time. We assume that the control
input at each time must satisfy a compact control input bound, u(t) ∈U ⊂Rm, and consider all
possible measurable control signals that satisfy the bound as the set of valid control signals U.
The safety constraint is defined by the constraint set C ⊂Rn, such that x(t) ∈C for all t ≥0.
The set can be represented as a zero-superlevel set of some continuous function c : Rn →R,
C = {x | c(x) ≥0}, or it can also be represented by an indicator function 1(x ∈C). Finally, the
control objective for the policy learning is
inf
u(·)∈U
Z ∞
0
e−γtg(x(t), u(t))dt
(2a)
s.t.
x(t) ∈C ∀t ≥0,
(2b)
3


where (2a) represents the task objective, with the running cost function g and a discount factor
γ > 0, and (2b) represents the safety constraint. We next decouple Problem (2) into the safety
problem and an action-constrained optimal control problem. We consider the finite-horizon and
the infinite-horizon worst-case safety value functions, derived in Hamilton-Jacobi (HJ) reachability
analysis [8, 9], defined by
V (x, t) := max
u(·) min
s∈[0,t] c(x(s)),
V (x) := lim
t→∞V (x, t).
(3)
Then, the maximal control invariant set within the constraint set C, denoted as S, is characterized
as the zero-superlevel set of the value function, S = {x | V (x) ≥0} [46]. If a trajectory exits the
set S, it inevitably violates the constraint (2b), i.e., x(t) /∈C at some time t > 0. The set of all
safe control inputs that prevent the safety violation, denoted as the maximal safe action set (at each
state), is determined by the value function as
U∗
safe(x) =
(U,
V (x) > 0,

u ∈U
 ∇V (x)⊤f(x, u) ≥0
	
,
V (x) = 0.
(4)
Based on U∗
safe, Problem (2) can be equivalently written as the following action-constrained form
[47]:
inf
u(·)∈U
Z ∞
0
e−γtg(x(t), u(t))dt
s.t.
u(t) ∈U∗
safe(x(t)) ∀t ≥0.
(5)
In practice, we can achieve a conservative solution of (5) by considering a more conservative safe
action set, satisfying Usafe(x) ⊆U∗
safe(x) for all x ∈S. In the classic safe control literature, these
safe action sets are constructed with various methods such as CBFs or predictive control [9, 48, 49].
Finally, (5) can be further conservatively approximated using the safety filtering architecture [9]:
Reference Policy:
πref = min
π∈Π
Z ∞
0
e−γtg(x(t), u(t))dt
s.t.
u(t) = π(x(t)) ∀t ≥0,
(6)
Safety filter:
πsafe(x(t), πref(x(t))) = arg min
u∈U ∥u −πref(x(t))∥2
(7a)
s.t.
u ∈Usafe(x(t)).
(7b)
In (6), a reference policy πref which primarily considers the task objective is optimized. Next, in
the safety filter (7), the filtered control input is determined by a mapping πsafe : Rn × U →U,
which maps the state and an unfiltered action into a filtered safe action. Equation (7a) considers
the min-norm objective, which modifies the reference action only when it is necessary for safety.
Other objectives can also be considered under various formulations, such as in robust or predictive
variants. The filtered output can be equivalently represented as the addition between the unfiltered
reference action u and the filter correction term ∆πsafe(x, u):
πsafe(x, u) = u + ∆πsafe(x, u).
(8)
In the CBF literature, ∆πsafe(x, u) is also called the CBF augmentation input [50].
Discriminating Hyperplane. For control-affine dynamics, which encapsulates rigid-body robot
dynamics, the safe action set can be effectively represented by the following halfspace constraint at
each state,
Usafe(x) = {u ∈U | a(x)⊤u ≥b(x)}.
(9)
Here, the pair (a(x), b(x)) defines a discriminating hyperplane (DH) in the control input space,
separating certified safe inputs from potentially unsafe inputs at each state [6]. This formulation
provides a universal representation of safety filter constraints for control-affine dynamics, which
includes classical CBF and HJ reachability (e.g., (4)) filters as special cases.
The key advan-
tage in using this representation is that the safety filter can now be learned from data by directly
4


(a) Target task (Unsafe) - State
(b) Safety Filtered - State
𝑝
𝜃
𝑡
𝑢
𝑡
Ref. Policy
𝜋ref(𝑥)
Residual RL
𝜋$%&' 
)'$.)+(𝑥, 𝜋,'&(𝑥))
Disc. Hyperplane
 𝜋$%&' 
-. (𝑥, 𝜋,'&(𝑥))
Safe Action Set
(c) Safety Filtered - Action
𝑡
𝑝
𝜃
Figure 3: Cart-Pole Running Example. (a) Reference policy is trained for a task positioning the cart position
to p = 0.6, and violates the safety constraint, p ≤0.5. (b) Learned safety filters can successfully prevent the
state from safety violations. (c) πsafe under the learned min-norm discriminating hyperplane safety filter (blue)
and residual RL (proposed method, brown).
learning the hyperplane parameters (aθ(x), bθ(x)), without requiring an explicit dynamics model
or an explicit computation of safety certificates such as the safety value function V in (3). With
the discriminating hyperplane, the min-norm filter correction is determined as ∆πsafe(x, u) =
max

0, (b(x) −a(x)⊤u)a(x)/∥a(x)∥2
2
	
, which is zero when u already satisfies (9).
Running Example (Cart-Pole).
We consider a simple cart-pole dynamics, with the state x =
[p; θ; ˙p; ˙θ], where p is the cart position and θ is the pole angle, and one-dimensional control input u
representing the torque applied to the pole, satisfying the bound [−1, 1]. The task is to stabilize the
cart position to p = 0.6, while keeping the pole upright (θ = 0). We consider the safety constraint
of keeping the cart position p ≤0.5, which is intentionally chosen to conflict with the task objective
for the illustrative purpose of the example. A simple MLP reference policy πref is learned through
PPO [51] which achieves the task (Fig. 3.(a)). Then, a discriminating hyperplane learned through
PPO in [6] is used to safety filter the reference policy (Fig. 3.(b)). The learned safe action set Usafe
is determined as [−1, b(x)
a(x)] if a(x) < 0, and [ b(x)
a(x), 1] if a(x) > 0. In Fig. 3.(c), the filtered action
(blue) and the safe action set (green background) are visualized along the safe trajectory.
Although the discriminating hyperplane works effectively for the running example, since it does
not directly learn the filtered safe control action but rather learns through the constraint representa-
tion, it generalizes less effectively for higher-dimensional systems. Also, it imposes the half-space
constraint structure to Usafe, which might be impractical for more complex systems (e.g., beyond
control-affine dynamics) whose safe action sets may be less structured (e.g, nonconvex and discon-
nected). In the next section, we propose an alternative approach of learning directly the correction
term ∆πsafe(x, u) through residual RL.
4
Learning Safety Filtering with Residual Reinforcement Learning
4.1
Learning Safety Filtering with Residual RL
To establish an RL-based framework and to deal with more complex systems like humanoids whose
dynamics are inherently more uncertain and stochastic, we now consider an MDP-based probabilis-
tic notion of safety. That is, we aim to learn Usafe such that under at ∈Usafe(st), where (st, at) is
the discrete-time state and action pair at timestep t, we achieve the highest probability of the safety
constraint satisfaction, which we call the safety rate, given as Pr

st ∈C ∀t ∈[0, T]

, where T is
the task time horizon. This is a stochastic reachability problem [52], and can be formulated as the
maximal survival time problem. As in [6], if we learned the safe action set Usafe with RL, we can
learn it by considering maxUsafe Eat∼Usafe(st)

Tsurv

, where Tsurv is the time at which an episode
terminates due to a constraint violation (st /∈C) or completion (in which Tsurv =T).
The main benefit of solving the safety problem in this way, compared to existing approaches that
solve the reachability value functions (3) with RL [19–28], is that the problem can be reformulated
5


as a sum-over-reward problem given by maxUsafe E
 PTsurv
t=0 1

. In contrast, existing approaches
typically involve a min-over-time objective, as in (3). This fundamentally leads to a different class
of Bellman equations [19], for which off-the-shelf RL algorithms such as PPO are not directly
applicable without specialized modifications.
With residual RL, we do not learn Usafe but intend to directly learn the correction term ∆πsafe in (8).
Thus, ∆πsafe is represented as a residual RL policy, whose inputs are the state st, and the (unfiltered)
control action determined by the reference policy, πref(st). Also, it involves learning the min-norm
filtering objective in (7a). Thus, the final form of our learning becomes
max
∆πθ
safe
Eat∼πθ
safe(st,πref(st))
h Tsurv
X
t=0
1 −λ||∆πθ
safe(st, at)||2
2
i
,
(10)
where πθ
safe(st, πref(st)) = πref(st) + ∆πθ
safe(st, πref(st)), and λ is a weight of the min-norm
objective penalty. The constant term 1 is known as the “alive bonus”, and is included in many
practical RL-based robot learning frameworks as one of the hand-designed reward terms [36]. If the
state st is not directly accessible, we can replace it with observations ot.
Running Example (Continued). We learn the residual RL safety filter for the cart-pole running ex-
ample using PPO with the reward defined in (10). As illustrated in Fig. 3.(c), the residual RL policy
closely approximates the min-norm safety filtered control input determined by the discriminating
hyperplane, with slight conservativeness. This additional conservativeness acts as a robustness mar-
gin and helps improve the safety rate for humanoid balance tasks in the next section.
4.2
Learning Safety Filters for Humanoid Balance
The main challenge of applying the residual RL framework established in the previous section to
humanoids is its high dimensionality. For Unitree G1, the state and input dimensions are n = 58,
m = 29. To learn an effective safety filter which explores enough in training to secure robustness
and generalizability, we need to carefully guide the training of residual RL (Fig. 2.(c)).
General Balance Motion Tracking Policy. We train the reference policy using the balance motion
tracking pipeline established in [2]. However, instead of training a policy to track only a single ref-
erence motion, we generate a large and diverse set of balance motions using the method in [39]. In
total, we generate 10,000 balance motions that cover a wide range of feasible humanoid configura-
tions and behaviors. Each motion has varying level of difficulty, which we can empirically evaluate
after the training of reference policy. Training on this diverse motion dataset encourages the safety
policy to learn a more general balance prior, rather than overfitting to a specific trajectory.
Reward Design for Residual RL. The residual policy is trained with a compact reward function that
encourages balance recovery while preserving the behavior of the nominal controller. In addition
to the two terms in (10), we add two additional safety rewards: base velocity stabilization term to
discourage excessive horizontal drift, and action smoothness penalty to reduce abrupt changes in
control. This can be considered as additional objective terms in safety filtering. The detailed reward
expressions and weights are provided in Appendix A.1.
Training Strategy. We train the residual policy using PPO [51] with an asymmetric actor-critic
framework [53]. The actor represents the deployable residual policy and only receives observations
available at deployment time, including proprioceptive states and the reference policy action. In
contrast, the critic is used only during training and can access privileged simulation information,
such as ground-truth body states. Moreover, during training, two additional techniques are intro-
duced to enhance the safety and robustness of the residual policy. First, we introduce a varying level
of payloads at various locations of the robot body, and random pushes to the robot to expose it to
failure or near-failure states for exploration. Without such excitation, the policy tends to learn a very
conservative safety filter which is impractical. Next, the residual policy learns safety corrections
for multiple reference policy checkpoints, which allows it to generalize against unseen unfiltered
actions. Additional details including training parameters are provided in Appendix A.2 and A.3.
6


Table 1: Performance–Robustness Trade-off.
Policy
Epos-l ↓
(w. payload)
Epos-l ↓
(w/o payload)
Fall Rate↓
(w. payload)
Baseline
38.6 mm
24.95 mm
7.29%
Baseline*
43.28 mm
44.40 mm
1.20%
ResSafe
37.66 mm
34.04 mm
1.11%
Table 2: Performance–Safety Trade-off.
Policy (safety-cost weight)
Epos-l ↓
Fall Rate↓
Baseline*
59.89 mm
1.17%
Baseline* + Safety (50)
101.68 mm
0.00%
Baseline* + Safety (100)
353.55 mm
1.63%
ResSafe
68.65 mm
0.5%
5
Experimental Results
In this section, we evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed residual policy for improving balance-
motion tracking under payload disturbances in both simulation and real-world hardware experi-
ments. The central hypotheses we want to evaluate are
1. Does decoupling the learning of safety and performance achieve a better performance–safety–
robustness trade-off compared to single-policy training that jointly optimizes all objectives
through a unified reward function?
2. Does the proposed residual RL safety filtering framework generalize across diverse motions and
previously unseen reference policies?
3. Does the proposed residual RL safety filter transfer effectively to real-world hardware?
5.1
Experimental Setup
We evaluate our method on the Unitree G1 humanoid robot across a range of balance tasks and pay-
load disturbances in both simulator and real-world hardware. Simulation experiments are conducted
using the IsaacGym [54] simulator.
We compare our method against three baselines: 1) the reference motion-tracking policy trained
without payload domain randomization (denoted as Baseline), 2) the reference policy trained di-
rectly with payload domain randomization (denoted as Baseline*), and 3) the discriminating hyper-
plane safety filter trained with PPO [6] (denoted as DH). Note that the discriminating hyperplane
demonstrates superior safety against classic safe RL methods in [12]. We use the local errors relative
to the robot base frame Epos-l to measure tracking accuracy, and the fall rate to measure robustness
and safety.
5.2
Simulation Results
For the Performance–Robustness Trade-off and Performance–Safety Trade-off evaluations, all poli-
cies are trained on a single reference motion. For the generalization evaluation, we train the policy
on the entire balance dataset.
Performance–Robustness Trade-off. Table 1 reports the tracking error and fall rate of different
policies. The baseline achieves reasonable tracking performance, but its fall rate increases under
random payloads, indicating that accurate motion tracking alone does not guarantee robustness when
the system dynamics change. Training the baseline directly with payload randomization improves
robustness, but leads to higher tracking error. In comparison, our approach achieves the lowest
fall rate while keeping the tracking error close to the nominal policy. This suggests that ResSafe
provides a better balance between robustness and tracking performance.
Performance–Safety Trade-off. Table 2 further compares our method with policies trained using
different safety-cost weights under random payloads. Adding a moderate safety cost can reduce the
fall rate, but larger safety weights significantly degrade tracking performance and do not consistently
improve safety. In contrast, ResSafe improves safety without causing severe tracking degradation.
This shows the benefit of separating nominal motion tracking from residual safety correction.
Generalization Across Different Reference Policies. We further evaluate whether the learned
residual policy can generalize across different reference policies. As shown in Fig. 4.(a), when
7


(a)
(b)
Reference
Single-Checkpoint Residual
Single-Checkpoint DH
Reference
Multi-Checkpoint Residual (Ours)
Multi-Checkpoint DH
Figure 4: Generalization across different reference policies. (a) Both the residual policy and the hyper-
plane policy are trained on a single reference-policy checkpoint. When they are applied to out-of-distribution
reference-policy checkpoints, the fall rate increases sharply. (b) Our method and the hyperplane policy are
trained with half of the checkpoints in the dataset, which leads to a smaller safety degradation when evaluated
with unseen checkpoints.
the residual policy is trained using a single reference policy checkpoint, its performance degrades
significantly when applied to other checkpoints, resulting in a substantially higher fall rate. In
contrast, a residual policy trained across multiple reference policy checkpoints maintains robustness
when deployed with unseen reference policies (Fig. 4.(b)). This suggests that the learned residual
correction captures general safety-relevant behaviors rather than overfitting to a particular reference
controller. We also observe that the DH safety filter is inferior in both safety and robustness.
5.3
Hardware Results
We further validate the proposed method on a physical humanoid robot. We train a policy on the
entire balance dataset in simulation and deploy it directly on the real robot. The policies are tested
for multiple reference motions with and without payloads attached to the limbs (Fig. 1). As shown
in Table 3, our method outperforms both the baseline and the discriminating hyperplane in terms of
fall rate and tracking error. Baseline*, achieves better tracking under payload because it is explicitly
trained with a tracking reward; however, its tracking error is worse without payload across multiple
motions due to over-conservatism from domain randomization. These results demonstrate that the
residual safety filtering policy can be transferred to the real robot and improve safety and robustness
when the robot performs challenging motion tasks.
6
Conclusion
We presented ResSafe, a performance–safety decoupling framework that combines a task-oriented
reference policy with a residual RL safety filter. We showed that the learned residual policy acts
similarly to a min-norm safety filter correction and demonstrated that this decoupled learning
paradigm achieves a superior performance–safety–robustness trade-off compared to conventional
single-policy training approaches. These results highlight the potential of decoupling performance
and safety as a pathway toward reusable and generalizable safety mechanisms for humanoids.
7
Limitations
While the proposed framework demonstrates promising empirical performance, several limitations
remain. First, because the safety filter is learned from data, it does not provide hard safety guaran-
tees in the sense of classical safety filters. Second, the residual policy consistently exhibits more
conservative behavior than the discriminating hyperplane filter, and a theoretical understanding of
this phenomenon remains an open question. Third, our approach relies on standard sim-to-real tech-
niques used in humanoid RL, such as system identification and domain randomization, and does
not explicitly address sim-to-real transfer, which contributes to the gap observed between simula-
tion and hardware experiments. Fourth, the generalization capability of the learned safety filter is
8


Table 3: Real-World Results (# indicates motion id in dataset).
Method
Fall
Epos-l (mm)
Method
Fall
Epos-l (mm)
(a) #9350 (w/ payload)
(b) #1665 (w/o payload)
Baseline
10/10 84.13 ± 12.99
Baseline
8/10 80.42 ± 23.16
Baseline* 0/10
47.73 ± 4.01
Baseline* 2/10 73.67 ± 13.53
DH
1/10 67.88 ± 20.13
DH
3/10 87.95 ± 21.10
Ours
2/10 49.81 ± 11.65
Ours
1/10 76.43 ± 6.22
(c) #6337 (w/ payload)
(d) #8407 (w/ payload)
Baseline
10/10 73.56 ± 14.68
Baseline
5/10 75.49 ± 28.52
Baseline* 5/10 62.00 ± 14.43
Baseline* 2/10 48.49 ± 13.62
DH
9/10 82.62 ± 22.98
DH
4/10 66.10 ± 15.04
Ours
0/10
70.01 ± 3.11
Ours
0/10 61.01 ± 4.41
limited by the diversity of the training motion dataset, although fine-tuning can be used to adapt to
new motions. Finally, the current framework operates as a blind safety filter without exteroceptive
perception. In contrast, human’s balancing and safety behaviors rely heavily on visual feedback and
environmental awareness. Incorporating perception and leveraging environmental affordances for
safety, inspired by recent work such as [55], is an important direction for future research.
Acknowledgments
We thank Siming He, Christopher Strong, Qiayuan Liao, and Junfeng Long for insightful discus-
sions, and Chuye Hong, Yiyang Shao, and Haoyi Niu for their help with the hardware experiments,
and VESSL AI for supporting this research with GPU compute resources. This work was supported
in part by the NSF Safe Learning Enabled Systems Program, Design of Robustly Implementable
Autonomous and Intelligent Machines, DARPA award number HR00112490425, and the UCLA
Samueli School of Engineering.
References
[1] Z. Li, X. B. Peng, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, G. Berseth, and K. Sreenath. Reinforcement learning
for versatile, dynamic, and robust bipedal locomotion control. The International Journal of
Robotics Research, 44(5):840–888, 2025.
[2] T. Zhang, B. Zheng, R. Nai, Y. Hu, Y.-J. Wang, G. Chen, F. Lin, J. Li, C. Hong, K. Sreenath,
et al. Hub: Learning extreme humanoid balance. In Conference on Robot Learning, pages
686–704. PMLR, 2025.
[3] S. Gu, L. Yang, Y. Du, G. Chen, F. Walter, J. Wang, and A. Knoll. A review of safe reinforce-
ment learning: Methods, theories, and applications. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, 46(12):11216–11235, 2024.
[4] J. Achiam, D. Held, A. Tamar, and P. Abbeel. Constrained policy optimization. In Proceedings
of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning, Proceedings of Machine Learning
Research. PMLR, 06–11 Aug 2017.
[5] A. D. Ames, S. Coogan, M. Egerstedt, G. Notomista, K. Sreenath, and P. Tabuada. Control
barrier functions: Theory and applications. In European Control Conference, 2019.
[6] W. Lavanakul, J. J. Choi, K. Sreenath, and C. J. Tomlin. Safety filters for black-box dynamical
systems by learning discriminating hyperplanes. In L4DC, 2024.
[7] F. Blanchini. Set invariance in control. Automatica, 35(11):1747–1767, 1999.
[8] S. Bansal, M. Chen, S. Herbert, and C. J. Tomlin.
Hamilton-Jacobi reachability: A brief
overview and recent advances. In IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), 2017.
9


[9] K. P. Wabersich, A. J. Taylor, J. J. Choi, K. Sreenath, C. J. Tomlin, A. D. Ames, and M. N.
Zeilinger. Data-driven safety filters: Hamilton-jacobi reachability, control barrier functions,
and predictive methods for uncertain systems. IEEE Control Systems Magazine, 2023.
[10] K.-C. Hsu, H. Hu, and J. F. Fisac. The safety filter: A unified view of safety-critical control in
autonomous systems. Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems, 7, 2023.
[11] J. Garcıa and F. Fern´andez. A comprehensive survey on safe reinforcement learning. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 16(1):1437–1480, 2015.
[12] A. Ray, J. Achiam, and D. Amodei. Benchmarking safe exploration in deep reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.01708, 7(1):2, 2019.
[13] K. Srinivasan, B. Eysenbach, S. Ha, J. Tan, and C. Finn. Learning to be safe: Deep rl with a
safety critic. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.14603, 2020.
[14] B. Thananjeyan, A. Balakrishna, S. Nair, M. Luo, K. Srinivasan, M. Hwang, J. E. Gonzalez,
J. Ibarz, C. Finn, and K. Goldberg. Recovery rl: Safe reinforcement learning with learned
recovery zones. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 6(3):4915–4922, 2021.
[15] N. C. Wagener, B. Boots, and C.-A. Cheng. Safe reinforcement learning using advantage-based
intervention. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pages 10630–10640. PMLR,
2021.
[16] E. Altman. Constrained markov decision processes with total cost criteria: Lagrangian ap-
proach and dual linear program. Mathematical Methods of Operations Research, 1998.
[17] Y. Chow, O. Nachum, E. Duenez-Guzman, and M. Ghavamzadeh. A lyapunov-based approach
to safe reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems, 31, 2018.
[18] K. Li, Z. Olkin, Y. Yue, and A. D. Ames. Clf-rl: Control lyapunov function guided reinforce-
ment learning. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2026.
[19] J. F. Fisac, N. F. Lugovoy, V. Rubies-Royo, S. Ghosh, and C. J. Tomlin. Bridging hamilton-
jacobi safety analysis and reinforcement learning. In Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), pages 8550–8556, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2019.
[20] S. Huh and I. Yang. Safe reinforcement learning for probabilistic reachability and safety spec-
ifications: A lyapunov-based approach. arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10126, 2020.
[21] K.-C. Hsu, D. P. Nguyen, and J. F. Fisac. Isaacs: Iterative soft adversarial actor-critic for safety.
In Learning for Dynamics and Control Conference, pages 90–103. PMLR, 2023.
[22] O. So, Z. Serlin, M. Mann, J. Gonzales, K. Rutledge, N. Roy, and C. Fan. How to train your
neural control barrier function: Learning safety filters for complex input-constrained systems.
In 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 11532–
11539. IEEE, 2024.
[23] J. Li, D. Lee, J. Lee, K. S. Dong, S. Sojoudi, and C. Tomlin. Certifiable reachability learning
using a new lipschitz continuous value function. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 10
(4):3582–3589, 2025.
[24] L. Yang, B. Werner, M. de Sa, and A. D. Ames. Cbf-rl: Safety filtering reinforcement learning
in training with control barrier functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.14959, 2025.
[25] D. D. Oh, J. Lidard, H. Hu, H. Sinhmar, E. Lazarski, D. Gopinath, E. S. Sumner, J. A. DeCas-
tro, G. Rosman, N. E. Leonard, et al. Safety with agency: Human-centered safety filter with
application to ai-assisted motorsports. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2025.
10


[26] J. Li, H. Hu, Y. Yang, and C. Liu. Verifiable safety q-filters via hamilton-jacobi reachability
and multiplicative q-networks. IEEE Control Systems Letters, 2025.
[27] B. Kim and H. J. Kim. Deep qp safety filter: Model-free learning for reachability-based safety
filter. In Annual Learning for Dynamics & Control Conference, 2026.
[28] W. Sharpless, O. So, D. Hirsch, S. Herbert, and C. Fan. Bellman value decomposition for task
logic in safe optimal control. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2026.
[29] C. Khazoom, D. Gonzalez-Diaz, Y. Ding, and S. Kim.
Humanoid self-collision avoid-
ance using whole-body control with control barrier functions.
In IEEE-RAS 21st Interna-
tional Conference on Humanoid Robots (Humanoids), pages 558–565, 2022. doi:10.1109/
Humanoids53995.2022.10000235.
[30] D. Baek, A. Purushottam, J. J. Choi, and J. Ramos. Whole-body bilateral teleoperation with
multi-stage object parameter estimation for wheeled humanoid locomanipulation. IEEE Trans-
actions on Robotics, 2026.
[31] Y. Sun, R. Chen, K. S. Yun, Y. Fang, S. Jung, F. Li, B. Li, W. Zhao, and C. Liu. Spark: Safe
protective and assistive robot kit, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.03132.
[32] L. Yang, B. Werner, R. K. Cosner, D. Fridovich-Keil, P. Culbertson, and A. D. Ames. Shield:
Safety on humanoids via cbfs in expectation on learned dynamics. In 2025 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 203–210. IEEE, 2025.
[33] K. Lee, S. Park, G. Park, M.-J. Kim, and J. Park. Safety-critical whole-body control for hu-
manoid robots via input-to-state safe control barrier functions, 2026. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2605.25546.
[34] J. J. Choi, F. Castaneda, C. J. Tomlin, and K. Sreenath. Reinforcement learning for safety-
critical control under model uncertainty, using control lyapunov functions and control barrier
functions. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2020.
[35] D. P. Nguyen, K.-C. Hsu, W. Yu, J. Tan, and J. F. Fisac. Gameplay filters: Robust zero-shot
safety through adversarial imagination. In 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning, 2024.
[36] T. He, C. Zhang, W. Xiao, G. He, C. Liu, and G. Shi. Agile but safe: Learning collision-free
high-speed legged locomotion. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2024.
[37] K. S. Yun, R. Chen, C. Dunaway, J. M. Dolan, and C. Liu. Safe control of quadruped in varying
dynamics via safety index adaptation. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), pages 7771–7777. IEEE, 2025.
[38] V. Zinage, N. Harutyunyan, E. Verheyden, F. Y. Hadaegh, and S.-J. Chung. Contractionppo:
Certified reinforcement learning via differentiable contraction layers. IEEE Robotics and Au-
tomation Letters, 11(5):6320–6327, 2026. doi:10.1109/LRA.2026.3678460.
[39] Y. Pan, R. Qiao, L. Chen, K. Chitta, L. Pan, H. Mai, Q. Bu, H. Zhao, C. Zheng, P. Luo, et al.
Agility meets stability: Versatile humanoid control with heterogeneous data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2511.17373, 2025.
[40] T. Johannink, S. Bahl, A. Nair, J. Luo, A. Kumar, M. Loskyll, J. A. Ojea, E. Solowjow, and
S. Levine. Residual reinforcement learning for robot control. In 2019 international conference
on robotics and automation (ICRA), pages 6023–6029. IEEE, 2019.
[41] K. Li, P. Li, T. Liu, Y. Li, and S. Huang. Maniptrans: Efficient dexterous bimanual manipula-
tion transfer via residual learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 6991–7003, 2025.
11


[42] Z. Huang, H. Yuan, Y. Fu, and Z. Lu.
Efficient residual learning with mixture-of-experts
for universal dexterous grasping. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
volume 2025, pages 87492–87510, 2025.
[43] R. Zhang, D. Zhang, and M. W. Mueller. Proxfly: Robust control for close proximity quad-
copter flight via residual reinforcement learning. In 2025 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 13683–13689. IEEE, 2025.
[44] Y. Ishihara, Y. Hazama, K. Suzuki, J. J. Yokono, K. Sabe, and K. Kawamoto. Improving wind
resistance performance of cascaded pid controlled quadcopters using residual reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01648, 2023.
[45] S. Zhao, Y. Ze, Y. Wang, C. K. Liu, P. Abbeel, G. Shi, and R. Duan. Resmimic: From gen-
eral motion tracking to humanoid whole-body loco-manipulation via residual learning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2510.05070, 2025.
[46] J. F. Fisac, A. K. Akametalu, M. N. Zeilinger, S. Kaynama, J. Gillula, and C. J. Tomlin. A
general safety framework for learning-based control in uncertain robotic systems. IEEE Trans-
actions on Automatic Control, 2018.
[47] H. Wang, A. Dhande, and S. Bansal. Cooptimizing safety and performance with a control-
constrained formulation. IEEE Control Systems Letters, 8:2739–2744, 2024. doi:10.1109/
LCSYS.2024.3511429.
[48] A. D. Ames, X. Xu, J. W. Grizzle, and P. Tabuada. Control barrier function based quadratic
programs for safety critical systems. IEEE Trans. on Automatic Control, 62(8):3861–3876,
2016.
[49] K. P. Wabersich and M. N. Zeilinger. A predictive safety filter for learning-based control of
constrained nonlinear dynamical systems. Automatica, 129:109597, 2021.
[50] E. Lavretsky. Servo-controllers with operational constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.12208,
2025.
[51] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov. Proximal policy optimization
algorithms, 2017.
[52] I. Jang, J. Park, C. E. Mballo, S. Cho, C. J. Tomlin, and H. J. Kim. Eigensafe: A spectral
framework for learning-based stochastic safety filtering. In Robotics: Science and Systems
(RSS), 2026.
[53] L. Pinto, M. Andrychowicz, P. Welinder, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel. Asymmetric actor critic
for image-based robot learning. In Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2018.
[54] V. Makoviychuk, L. Wawrzyniak, Y. Guo, M. Lu, K. Storey, M. Macklin, D. Hoeller, N. Rudin,
A. Allshire, A. Handa, and G. State. Isaac gym: High performance gpu based physics simu-
lation for robot learning. In Proceedings of the Neural Information Processing Systems Track
on Datasets and Benchmarks, 2021.
[55] T. He, Z. Wang, H. Xue, Q. Ben, Z. Luo, W. Xiao, Y. Yuan, X. Da, F. Casta˜neda, S. Sastry,
C. Liu, G. Shi, L. Fan, and Y. Zhu. Viral: Visual sim-to-real at scale for humanoid loco-
manipulation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 13430–13441, 2026.
12


A
Residual Reinforcement Learning Details
A.1
Reward Design
This section summarizes the reward design of ResSafe, which is decoupled from the tracking reward.
Table 4: Reward components and weights.
Term
Expression
Weight
Remarks
Reward
Alive bonus
1
1.6
Base linear velocity stabilization
exp
 
−∥vbase
xy,t∥2
2
σ2
lin
!
2.5
σlin = 0.3
Base angular velocity stabilization
exp
 
−∥ωbase
xyz,t∥2
2
σ2ang
!
4
σang = 1.2
Penalty
Termination
1
−60
Minimal intervention
aapplied
t
−areference
t

2
2
−0.07
Action smoothness
aapplied
t
−aapplied
t−1

2
2
−0.01
A.2
State Space Design
This subsection describes the state-space design used in our asymmetric actor–critic residual rein-
forcement learning.
Table 5: State space information of the critic network input.
State Term
Dimensions
Rigid body position
87
Rigid body rotation
180
Rigid body velocity
90
Rigid body angular velocity
90
Applied action
29
Reference policy action
29
History State Term
Dimensions
DoF position
29
DoF velocity
29
Base angular velocity
3
Projected gravity
3
Applied action
29
History steps
2
Total dim
505 + 93 × 2 = 691
Table 6: State space information of the actor network input.
State Term
Dimensions
DoF position
29
DoF velocity
29
Base angular velocity
3
Projected gravity
3
Applied action
29
Reference policy action
29
Total dim
122
13


A.3
Training Parameters
In this subsection, we provide the training parameters used for ResSafe.
Table 7: Hyperparameters.
Hyperparameter
Value
Optimizer
Adam
Adam coefficients (β1, β2)
(0.9, 0.999)
Learning rate
1 × 10−3
Rollout horizon Nsteps
36
Number of mini-batches
12
Discount factor γ
0.99
PPO clipping parameter
0.2
Entropy coefficient
0.001
Gradient clipping norm
5
Value loss coefficient
1
Initial policy std.
0.5
Number of learning epochs
5
MLP hidden layers
[512, 256, 128]
A.4
Domain Randomization
We use the same dynamics domain randomization as in HuB [2], while additionally introducing
payload perturbations and a curriculum learning scheme for random push disturbances.
Table 8: Domain-randomization settings.
Term
Value
Push Disturbance Curriculum Learning
Curriculum variable
vxy ∈U(0, vmax) m/s,
interval = 4 s
Initial value
vmax = 0.0 m/s
Maximum value
vmax = 0.5 m/s
Update rule
vmax ←min(vmax + 0.01, 0.5),
if episode length > 300,
vmax ←max(vmax −0.01, 0.0),
if episode length < 250,
vmax ←vmax,
otherwise.
Payload Disturbance
Payload links
{L/R wrist, L/R elbow, L/R shoulder}
Added mass per link
madd ∼U(0, 3) kg
B
Experimental Details
We provide additional implementation details for the experiments reported in the main paper.
B.1
Performance–Robustness Trade-off
The performance–robustness trade-off experiments are conducted in a single motion setting, in
which all methods are trained and evaluated on the same reference motion. In HuB, the final pol-
icy is obtained through teacher–student distillation. We use the student reference policy to train our
general residual policy. However, in the performance–safety trade-off experiment in Section B.2, we
aim to incorporate an additional safety reward during training. To avoid introducing distillation as
an additional confounding factor, we use the teacher policy as the reference policy in both trade-off
experiments. The residual policy training uses the state space shown in Table 5 for both the actor
and critic networks.
14


B.2
Performance–Safety Trade-off
Similarly, the performance–safety trade-off experiments are conducted in a single motion setting,
in which all methods are trained and evaluated on the same reference motion. We use the teacher
policy as the reference policy, and the residual policy training uses the state space shown in Table 5
for both the actor and critic networks.
B.3
Generalization Across Different Reference Policies
In contrast, in the generalization experiment, the residual policy is trained on the full motion dataset
using the student general reference policy, since the goal is to evaluate whether the learned residual
policy can transfer across different reference policy checkpoints and a broader motion distribution.
B.4
Hardware Results
In the hardware experiment, the residual policy is trained on the full motion dataset using the student
general reference policy and evaluated on different motions from the dataset.
15
