Title: Convex optimization on moment polytopes: Hadamard mirror descent and efficient algorithms for quantum functionals and other tensor parameters

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.06633v1

Published Time: Wed, 09 Sep 2026 01:22:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 81

Markdown Content:
# Convex optimization on moment polytopes: Hadamard mirror descent and efficient algorithms for quantum functionals and other tensor parameters 

M. Levent Do ˘ gan * Keiya Sakabe * Michael Walter *

Abstract 

Convex optimization on polytopes arises in many areas of science. When the polytope is given implicitly or has exponentially many vertices and facets, standard methods may not ap-ply or be ineffective. This is the case for moment polytopes, such as the entanglement polytopes ,which play a foundational role in quantum information and algebraic complexity. They give rise to important entanglement measures and tensor parameters such as the quantum function-als , yet general effective methods for computing these quantities have been elusive. In this paper we address this challenge. We develop a first-order framework called Hadamard mirror descent to optimize suitable convex functions over moment polytopes and, more gener-ally, the gradient sets of geodesically convex functions. It operates locally and does not rely on any explicit description of the polytope. Our framework extends mirror descent, an effective and widely used framework for convex optimization, from the Euclidean setting to Hadamard manifolds, and is motivated by a recent work by Hirai, which we interpret as a Hadamard version of mirror flow. Applying the framework to entanglement polytopes yields the first ef-ficient first-order algorithms to compute the quantum functionals and other tensor parameters. In more detail, our contributions are as follows: • We introduce Hadamard mirror descent , a framework to optimize general holonomy-invariant 

convex objectives over the gradient sets of geodesically convex functions on Hadamard manifolds, and provide rigorous convergence guarantees under natural hypotheses. • We show that this framework applies to convex optimization on moment polytopes , which arise from the gradients of geodesically convex Kempf–Ness functions. • We obtain the first efficient algorithm for computing quantum functionals: a simple en-tropic tensor scaling method converges in a number of steps polynomial in the input length of the tensor and the inverse accuracy. • We obtain analogous algorithms for other important tensor parameters (symmetric quan-tum functional, G-stable rank, and non-commutative rank), as well as for norm minimiza-tion on moment polytopes (a key stability parameter in invariant theory). Before this work, such algorithms were only known in special cases and for the non-commutative rank; for the latter, our algorithm appears conceptually simpler than prior work. 

> *

LMU Munich & MCQST, {mahmut.dogan,keiya.sakabe,michael.walter}@lmu.de arXiv:2609.06633v1 [cs.CC] 6 Sep 2026 Contents 

1 Introduction 2

1.1 Motivation: Moment polytopes, non-commutative gradients, and mirror descent . . 51.2 Framework and general results: Hadamard mirror descent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71.3 Convex optimization on moment polytopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91.4 Convex optimization on entanglement polytopes of tensors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 1.4.1 Quantum functionals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 1.4.2 Symmetric quantum functional . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 1.4.3 G-stable rank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 1.4.4 Non-commutative rank . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 1.5 Organization of the paper . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 

2 Preliminaries 18 

2.1 Hadamard manifolds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 2.2 Positive-definite matrices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 2.3 Hadamard symmetric spaces and self-adjoint subgroups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 

3 Holonomy-invariant objectives and generalized gradients 20 

3.1 Holonomy-invariant convex objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 3.2 Objectives on Hadamard symmetric spaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 3.3 Generalized gradient . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 

4 Hadamard mirror flow 26 

4.1 Definition and Euclidean interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 4.2 Convergence analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 

5 Hadamard mirror descent 28 

5.1 Definition and Euclidean interpretation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 5.2 Convergence analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 5.3 Relative smoothness and dual smoothness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 

6 Convex optimization on moment polytopes 33 

6.1 Moment polytopes and Kempf–Ness functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 6.2 Convex optimization on moment polytopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35 6.3 Smoothness and dual-smoothness of Kempf–Ness functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42 6.4 Tensor action and entanglement polytopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47 6.5 Tensor power action and symmetric entanglement polytopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51 6.6 Polynomial actions of general linear groups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54 

7 Applications 56 

7.1 Norm minimization over moment polytopes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56 7.2 Quantum functionals and entropic tensor scaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58 7.3 Symmetric quantum functional . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 7.4 G-stable rank via smoothing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65 7.5 Non-commutative rank by 1-norm minimization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67 

A Matrix scaling via marginal entropy maximization 70 B Technical proofs 72 

11 Introduction 

Convex optimization on polytopes is a fundamental problem that arises broadly in computer sci-ence and mathematics, with applications ranging from graph algorithms to machine learning: minimize ϕ(p) over p ∈ D (D is a polytope, ϕ is convex ). (1.1) In the classical setting of linear programming, one optimizes a linear function subject to linear constraints that define a polytope. For example, the famous maximum-flow problem is a linear program on the flow polytope, and bipartite matching reduces to optimization over the Birkhoff polytope (the convex hull of the permutation matrices). Linear relaxations of NP-hard combinato-rial optimization problems, such as arise from the cut-polytope formulation of MAX-CUT or the integer-programming formulation of vertex cover, are ubiquitous and can yield approximation algorithms with provable guarantees. In computer science, information theory, and physics, one frequently encounters the problem of maximizing the Shannon entropy H (p) := − ∑ni=1 pi log pi,which measures the uncertainty in a distribution. Entropy maximization with mean constraints is a fundamental tool in approximation algorithms, including algorithms for the traveling sales-man problem [AGM +10, SV14, SV19], and for volume approximation of polytopes and spectra-hedra [BH10a, BH10b, BH12, BR24, DLR22]. In the context of probability theory and statistical physics, the same problem arises through the maximum-entropy principle of Jaynes [Jay57a, Jay57b], which asserts that the best guess for an unknown probability distribution is the one that maxi-mizes the entropy subject to the known constraints. When the polytope is given explicitly, e.g., as a list of vertices or inequalities, standard tech-niques such as ellipsoid, cutting-plane, or interior-point methods often yield efficient algorithms for convex optimization [Kel60, Kha79, Kha80, Ren01]. However, for many interesting problems, the polytope is only given more implicitly , such as the polytope of all spanning trees associated to a graph, i.e., the matroid polytope of spanning trees. In this setting, more advanced techniques are required that do not rely on efficient enumeration of vertices or facets. One particularly successful strategy is to represent a polytope in terms of the 

gradients of a convex function. Suppose that D ⊂ Rn is a polytope with vertices ω1, ω2, . . . , ωm.An easy calculation shows that D coincides with the topological closure of the gradient set of a 

log-sum-exp function: 

D = {∇ f (x) | x ∈ Rn}, where f (x) := log 

> m

# ∑

> i=1

e⟨ωi ,x⟩

!

. (1.2) Functions of log-sum-exp form have found numerous applications, such as in machine learning [HKA16, CGP20a, CGP20b]. Their optimization falls into the framework of geometric program-ming [BKVH07]. Using Eq. (1.2), we may recast problem (1.1) as follows: minimize ϕ ∇ f (x) over x ∈ Rn. (1.3) This reformulation offers two significant advantages. First, viewing a polytope as (the closure of) the set of gradients of a convex function can provide a succinct “encoding” of complicated polytopes. For example, even for a polytope with an exponential number of vertices (such as the convex hull of all spanning trees of a graph), the convex function f still has only n variables (the number of edges in the aforementioned example). Moreover, even if f has exponentially many terms when written naively in the log-sum-exp form, it is sometimes possible to represent it com-pactly and evaluate it efficiently; for spanning-tree polytopes this is provided by the weighted 2version of Kirchhoff’s theorem [Bol02]; see, e.g., [AGM +10]. More generally, recent works on en-tropy maximization consider evaluation access to f as a generalized counting oracle [SV14, SV19]. Second, the reformulation in (1.3) transforms the original constrained optimization problem into an unconstrained one, which enables simpler algorithms. To see this, assume that both f and the objective ϕ are sufficiently differentiable. Then the composite function ϕ(∇ f (x)) is differen-tiable and its derivative can be computed via the chain rule: ddt t=0

ϕ(∇ f (x + tY )) = ∇2 f (x) [ ∇ϕ (∇ f (x)) , Y] . (1.4) Because f is convex, its Hessian ∇2 f (x) is positive semidefinite, and hence we see from Eq. (1.4) that moving infinitesimally in the direction of Y := −∇ ϕ(∇ f (x)) will never increase ϕ(∇ f (x)) .This motivates the following first-order descent algorithm: 

xk+1 := xk − η∇ϕ(∇ f (xk)) . (1.5) In fact, under standard hypotheses, this coincides precisely with the celebrated mirror descent algo-rithm [NY83] when expressed in dual (i.e., gradient) variables, for the distance-generating func-tion h = f ∗ and the objective function ϕ. Foundational results in the modern theory of mirror descent [BBT17, LFN18] state that the step size can be taken as the inverse of the relative smooth-ness parameter L of ϕ with respect to h. In dual variables, this parameter is defined in terms of a ratio of Bregman divergences as follows: 

Dϕ(∇ f (y)∥∇ f (x)) ≤ L · Df (x∥y) (x, y ∈ Rn), (1.6) where DF (w∥z) := F(w) − F(z) − ⟨∇ F(z), w − z⟩ is the Bregman divergence of a convex function F.For the step size η = 1/ L, mirror descent minimizes ϕ at a rate of O(k−1) [BBT17, LFN18]. Remarkably, convex polytopes arise from gradients of convex functions in situations far more general than the Euclidean setting discussed above. In pure mathematics, this goes back to cele-brated convexity theorems in symplectic geometry by Kirwan and Ness–Mumford [Kir84, NM84], generalizing earlier works on special cases by Kostant, Atiyah, Guillemin–Sternberg, and many others [Kos73, Ati82, GS82]. 1 Much more recently, a line of work in computer science has over the past decade begun to develop a quantitative and algorithmic framework that unifies and gen-eralizes paradigmatic methods, such as matrix and operator scaling [LSW98, GGOW16, GGOW18, AZGL +18, BGO +18, BFG +18, Fra18, BFG +19, FW20, HNW23, HS24, Hir25, Hir26]. We describe the setting and the emergence of polytopes more concretely in Section 1.1 below, but for now it suf-fices to say that the corresponding polytopes are known as moment polytopes and they arise from convex functions on curved spaces called Hadamard manifolds associated with non-commutative 

group actions. Importantly, they capture foundational problems across mathematics and com-puter science. We only give a few examples and refer to [BFG +19] for many more applications: • In algebraic complexity, important tensor parameters are defined by convex optimization over moment polytopes, which in this case are called entanglement polytopes . An important example is the family of quantum functionals [CVZ23]; they are universal spectral points in the sense of Strassen, constrain the asymptotic restriction of tensors, and bound complexity-theoretic measures such as the asymptotic subrank [BCS96, Zui18]. 

> 1The well-known Schur–Horn theorem on the relation between the diagonal entries and the eigenvalues of Hermi-tian matrices is a special case.

3• In analysis, they arise as Brascamp–Lieb polytopes , which characterize the validity of the so-called Brascamp–Lieb inequalities. These are integral inequalities that generalize the Hölder and Loomis–Whitney inequalities [BCCT08, GGOW18]. • In quantum information, entanglement polytopes characterize which local quantum states can be obtained from multipartite quantum states in a given entanglement class [WDGC13]; as a special case, this captures the one-body quantum marginal and N-representability prob-lems [Kly02, Kly04, Kly06]. In particular, natural problems such as marginal entropy maxi-mization are captured by convex optimization on entanglement polytopes. • In geometric invariant theory, a fundamental problem is to determine whether a vector is in the so-called null cone of a group action and, if so, to determine its instability . This is captured by minimizing the Euclidean norm over its moment polytope, as follows from celebrated results by Kempf–Ness and others [Kem78, KN79, NM84, Kir84]. • In matrix analysis, the Horn polytopes capture the relation between the eigenvalues of Hermi-tian matrices A, B, C such that A + B = C [Hor62, Kly98, KT99]; see also [Ful00]. Despite its significance, efficient optimization over moment polytopes has proved to be a major challenge. Moment polytopes often have exponentially many vertices and facets; moreover, their explicit description is rarely known; see, e.g., [vdBCL +25b] and references therein. Thus, stan-dard convex optimization techniques often cannot be applied or are inefficient. To date, there has been major algorithmic progress in important special cases—most notably through operator scaling, tensor scaling, and the broader non-commutative optimization framework [GGOW16, GGOW18, Fra18, AZGL +18, BGO +18, BFG +18, BFG +19, HNW23, Hir25]. While general algo-rithms are known that address the membership problem in moment polytopes, they do so ineffi-ciently (in particular, this is the case for all examples given above). Hence these prior works do not imply an efficient algorithm for convex optimization on these polytopes, a major open problem. In this work, we address this challenge: we develop a first-order framework called Hadamard mirror descent to optimize suitable convex functions over moment polytopes and, more generally, the gradients of geodesically convex functions. Importantly, it operates locally and does not rely on any explicit description of the polytope. We achieve this by extending mirror descent from the Euclidean setting to Hadamard manifolds. It is motivated by recent work by Hirai, which we in-terpret as a Hadamard version of the continuous-time dynamics corresponding to mirror descent. Applied to moment polytopes, this framework yields efficient first-order algorithms to compute quantum functionals and other tensor parameters. In more detail, our main contributions are: • We introduce Hadamard mirror descent , a framework to optimize a broad class of convex ob-jectives over the gradient set of geodesically convex functions on Hadamard manifolds, and provide rigorous O(k−1) convergence guarantees under natural hypotheses. • We show that this framework applies to convex optimization on moment polytopes , which arise from the gradients of geodesically convex Kempf–Ness functions. This application requires us to quantitatively bound the relevant complexity parameters of the general framework. • We obtain the first efficient algorithm for computing quantum functionals: a simple entropic tensor scaling method converges in a number of steps polynomial in the input length of the tensor and the inverse accuracy. • We obtain analogous algorithms for other important tensor parameters (symmetric quantum functional, G-stable rank, and non-commutative rank), as well as for norm minimization on moment polytopes (a key stability parameter in invariant theory). Before our work, such algorithms were only known in special cases, and for the non-commutative rank, for which we obtain an algorithm that appears conceptually simpler than prior work. 4The rest of the introduction is organized as follows: Section 1.1 explains concretely, using the ex-ample of entanglement polytopes, how convex polytopes can emerge from the gradients of convex functions on curved spaces, and sketches how one naturally obtains a descent algorithm general-izing Eq. (1.5). Section 1.2 describes Hadamard mirror descent in its appropriate generality and states our convergence theorem; we also discuss the associated complexity parameters. Section 1.3 applies the preceding to moment polytopes and Section 1.4 specializes further to the entanglement polytopes of tensors to obtain efficient algorithms for quantum functionals, the symmetric quan-tum functional, the G-stable rank, and the non-commutative rank. 

1.1 Motivation: Moment polytopes, non-commutative gradients, and mirror descent 

Moment polytopes are implicitly defined polytopes that arise from “nice” group actions. To make this concrete and motivate our general approach, we use the tensor action as our running example: the action of the group GL : = GL (n1) × · · · × GL (nd) on the space Nd 

> ℓ=1

Cnℓ = Cn1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ Cnd of 

d-tensors via (g1, . . . , gd) · T := ( g1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ gd)T. We denote the positive-definite group elements by PD : = PD (n1) × · · · × PD (nd) and denote by ⟨· , ·⟩ the inner product on Nd 

> ℓ=1

Cnℓ . Our goal is to associate to any tensor T̸ = 0 a polytope. To this end, we consider the Kempf–Ness function 2

fT : PD → R, fT (x1, . . . , xd) = log ⟨T, (x1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ xd)T⟩. (1.7) We can think of this as a non-commutative generalization of the log-sum-exp function in Eq. (1.2). To see the connection, write xi = g† 

> i

ediag (zi ) gi for gi ∈ GL (ni) and zi ∈ Rni . Then: 

fT (x1, . . . , xd) = log ∑

> i1,..., id

|Si1,..., id |2ez1, i1 +··· +zd,id , where S := ( g1, . . . , gd) · T,which has the form of Eq. (1.2). As a consequence, we see that fT is convex along arbitrary curves of the form xi(t) = g† 

> i

ediag (zi +tw i ) gi (t ∈ R). 3 What are these curves? Clearly, they are not straight lines in the naive Euclidean sense of ni × ni matrices. Instead, they are the geodesics if PD (ni) is equipped with the affine-invariant Riemannian metric. 4 This metric turns PD (ni) and hence PD into a so-called Hadamard manifold —a particularly nice kind of Riemannian manifold with nonpositive curvature. Thus, the Kempf–Ness function fT is a geodesically convex function on PD. Now, how does a polytope emerge from the gradient set of this function? One immediate challenge we face is that the gradients ∇ fT (x) for x ∈ PD all live in different tangent spaces. We therefore use the manifold’s parallel transport to move them all to the same tangent space, say, the tangent space at the identity I ∈ PD, which is naturally identified with the d-tuples of Hermitian matrices H := Herm (n1) × · · · × Herm (nd) with the Hilbert–Schmidt inner product. But now we face the real challenge: unlike in the Euclidean setting, the parallel transport will depend on the choice of curve along which we transport 5—different curves will give results that differ by the manifold’s holonomy, which in the present case amounts to conjugating a matrix tuple in H by unitary matrices. To overcome this ambiguity, we can look at unitarily invariant data, namely the                                                

> 2Note that this function simply measures the norm of the tensor as we vary over the orbit GL ·T:={g·T|g∈GL },since fT(g†g) = log ∥g·T∥2; this was the original motivation for the definition [KN79].
> 3Note that diag (zi)and diag (wi)are diagonal matrices and hence they commute. If we replace them by non-commuting Hermitian matrices, we no longer obtain a log-sum-exp function and indeed convexity will in general fail. In other words, we cannot simply turn fTinto an ordinary Euclidean convex function by the change of variables xi=eXi.
> 4The affine-invariant Riemannian metric on PD (n)is given by the formula g(X,Y)x:=tr [x−1Xx −1Y]at x∈PD (n);we regard the tangent vectors X,Yas Hermitian matrices in Herm (n), using that PD (n)is an open subset of Herm (n).
> 5Arguably there is a canonical choice for this curve in our setting—the geodesic—but this does not yield a convex polytope in H(in general, no fixed choice of curves works for all tensors).

5eigenvalue spectra. The result of parallel transporting the gradients to the identity, computing the eigenvalues, and taking the closure has a simple concrete description: 6

∆(T) := {spec τx→I ∇ fT (x) : x ∈ PD }

=

(

spec S(1)S(1)†

∥S∥2 , . . . , spec S(d)S(d)†

∥S∥2

!

0̸ = S ∈ GL ·T

)

⊆ Rn1 

> ↓

×· · ·× Rnd 

> ↓

, (1.8) where τx→I denotes parallel transport from x to I; spec (·) denotes the sorted eigenvalues of a Hermitian matrix, and the componentwise extension to matrix tuples; and S(ℓ) denotes the ℓ-th 

flattening obtained by regarding S as a linear map S(ℓ) : N  

> j̸=ℓ

Cnj → Cnℓ . Note the similarity to Eq. (1.2). We also observe that ∆(T) is a subset of a Cartesian product of probability simplices. Remarkably, ∆(T) is a convex polytope—known as the tensor’s entanglement polytope [WDGC13]. General moment polytopes arise in just the same way from any vector in a “nice” (rational) rep-resentation of a “nice” (self-adjoint) matrix group G ⊆ GL (n). One considers the Kempf–Ness func-tion associated with the vector, which is a geodesically convex function on a nonpositively curved space G ∩ PD (n). Suitably interpreted, the closure of the gradient set of the Kempf–Ness function becomes a convex polytope, known as the vector’s moment polytope [Kir84, NM84, BFG +19]. We now consider optimization over the entanglement polytope. Let ϕ : Rn1 × · · · × Rnd → R

be a convex objective function that we wish to minimize. Since the entanglement polytope is described in terms of eigenvalue spectra, which carry no intrinsic order, it is natural to assume that ϕ is permutation-symmetric in each argument. Such a function extends to a unitarily invariant convex function Φ : H → R by Φ(X1, . . . , Xd) := ϕ(spec X1, . . . , spec Xd). Then, assuming mild regularity, convex optimization over the entanglement polytope can be written as min  

> p∈∆(T)

ϕ(p) = inf  

> x∈PD

Φ(τx→I ∇ fT (x)) . (1.9) This reformulates the problem of convex optimization over entanglement polytopes, which have a rather intricate and implicit definition, as an unconstrained optimization over the gradients of the simple Kempf–Ness function—in precise analogy to the transition from Eq. (1.1) to Eq. (1.3). Following Hirai [Hir25], this can also be expressed more abstractly, yet more intrinsically, by extending the objective to the cotangent bundle T ∗ PD. To this end, we regard Φ as a function QI

on the cotangent space T∗ 

> I

PD using the Riemannian metric, and extend it to a function Q on the entire cotangent bundle via parallel transport ( Qx := QI ◦ τ∗

> I→x

). Then: inf  

> x∈PD

Φ(τx→I ∇ fT (x)) = inf  

> x∈PD

Q(d fT (x)) . (1.10) The advantage of this formulation is that, unlike the gradient, the differential d fT is defined inde-pendently of the metric. 7 Motivated by this, Hirai proposed the general minimization problem minimize Q(d f (x)) over x ∈ M , (1.11) where f is a geodesically convex function on an arbitrary Hadamard manifold M, and Q is a fiberwise convex function on the cotangent bundle that is invariant under parallel transport;                                            

> 6This follows by a short calculation: ∇fT(x) = ( x1/2 1ρ1x1/2 1, . . . , x1/2
> dρdx1/2
> d), where ρℓ=S(ℓ)S(ℓ)†/∥S∥2and S:=(x1/2 1, . . . , x1/2
> d)·T; we identify TxPD ∼=Hin the canonical way by using the fact that PD ⊆His an open subset. In the same coordinates, parallel transport along the geodesic to the identity is given by x−1/2 ∇fT(x)x−1/2 = ( ρ1, . . . , ρd).
> 7The same is true in the Euclidean setting: Problem (1.3) is more intrinsically cast as a minimization of Q df(x)for a convex objective Q:(Rn)∗→R.

6we call such a function Q a holonomy-invariant convex objective . Using this invariance and the chain rule, Hirai showed that (under suitable regularity and domain assumptions) the derivative of Q(d f (xt)) along an arbitrary curve xt is given by dds s=t

Q(d f (xs)) = ∇2 f (xt)[ ∇Q f (xt), ˙ xt], (1.12) where ∇Q f (x) := dQx (d f (x)) ∈ Tx M is called the Q-gradient of f .8 The geodesic convexity of f implies that its Riemannian Hessian ∇2 f is positive semidefinite, and hence Q(d f (xt)) is nonincreasing along the following descent flow: ˙xt = −∇ Q f (xt). (1.13) Hirai proposed this Q-gradient flow and established qualitative convergence to the infimum of problem (1.11) under suitable hypotheses, for a broad class of Hadamard manifolds such as PD (n).The starting point for our work is a new interpretation of Hirai’s flow: we observe that Eq. (1.12) is precisely the manifold analogue of the Euclidean identity in Eq. (1.4). Thus, Hirai’s flow can be interpreted as a mirror flow on a Hadamard manifold. This connection motivates us to extend the powerful theory of mirror descent to the Hadamard setting. This allows us to obtain quantitative 

convergence guarantees for both the flow and its discrete-time counterpart, and then apply the resulting framework to moment polytope optimization to derive our concrete algorithmic results. 

1.2 Framework and general results: Hadamard mirror descent 

We now present our framework of Hadamard mirror descent and our general convergence re-sults. Throughout, we consider a Hadamard manifold M, that is, a complete, simply connected Riemannian manifold with nonpositive sectional curvature. Our goal is to address the general minimization problem (1.11), which we restate for convenience: minimize Q(d f (x)) over x ∈ M . (1.14) Here, f is a geodesically convex function on M, meaning it is convex when restricted to any geodesic, and Q is a holonomy-invariant convex objective on the cotangent bundle T∗M. As explained above, the latter means that its restrictions Qx to any cotangent space are lower semicontinuous (l.s.c.) and Euclidean convex, and related to each other by parallel transport (independently of the choice of curves). We also assume sufficient regularity so that (1.14) and the Q-gradient are well-defined; the precise details can be found in Definitions 3.1 and 3.10. In Section 4, we formalize our observation that Hirai’s Q-gradient flow (1.13) is a Hadamard-manifold generalization of mirror flow , the continuous-time version of mirror descent [NY83], and show a general O(t−1) convergence result for arbitrary Hadamard manifolds that applies under natural hypotheses; this significantly generalizes the qualitative convergence result of [Hir25] and makes it quantitative. In Section 5, we consider the corresponding discrete-time method, which we call Hadamard mirror descent , as it precisely generalizes the mirror descent update (1.5): 

xk+1 := exp xk (−η∇Q f (xk)) , (1.15) where ∇Q f (x) := dQx(d f (x)) ∈ Tx M is Hirai’s Q-gradient and exp x : Tx M → M the exponen-tial map.             

> 8In other words, the Q-gradient of fis the Riemannian gradient of Q(df(x)) if the manifold Mis equipped with the Riemannian metric induced by the Hessian ∇2f(assuming the latter is everywhere positive definite).

7We now explain the quantities that control the convergence of Hadamard mirror descent. On the one hand, the convergence depends on the choice of step size η; we comment more on this below. On the other hand, it depends on a certain natural function gap. Let bξ : M → R be a Busemann function: an analog of a linear function on Hadamard manifolds. The invariance under parallel transport implies that Q(ξ) := Q(−dbξ (x)) is well-defined, independently of x.Let f ξ := f + bξ be the shifted geodesically convex function. Then we have the following result: 

Theorem 1.1 (Convergence of Hadamard mirror descent, see Theorem 5.5 and Proposition 5.9) .

Under a natural step-size condition (satisfied for η = 1/ L with L the relative smoothness parameter dis-cussed below), we have, for any Busemann function b ξ and any k ≥ 1,Q(d f (xk)) − Q(ξ) ≤ f ξ (x0) − inf f ξ

ηk .

In particular: 

lim  

> k→∞

Q(d f (xk)) = inf  

> x∈M

Q(d f (x)) .In the Euclidean case M = Rn, the quantity f ξ (x) − inf f ξ for the linear function bξ = −⟨ ξ, ·⟩ 

equals the Bregman divergence Dh(ξ∥∇ f (x)) of the distance-generating function h = f ∗ (under natural hypotheses). Hence, Theorem 1.1 is a natural generalization of the foundational conver-gence results in Euclidean mirror descent [BBT17, LFN18]. Theorem 1.1 serves as the general convergence theorem from which the algorithmic results of the paper are derived. The remainder of the introduction successively specializes this result, first to convex optimization on moment polytopes, and then further to concrete tensor parameters. As for the choice of step size η, we show that the notion of relative smoothness readily generalizes to this setting when phrased in the dual form (1.6): we say that the pair ( f , Q) is L-relatively smooth if 

DQx (τ∗

> x→y

d f (y)∥d f (x)) ≤ L · DM 

> f

(x∥y) (∀x, y ∈ M ), (1.16) where DM 

> f

(x∥y) := f (x) − f (y) − d f (y)[ exp −1 

> y

(x)] is the Riemannian Bregman divergence. Then, Theorem 1.1 applies with step size η = 1/ L.9 In the Euclidean setting, if f and Q are individually smooth 10 with parameters L f and LQ, respectively, then relative smoothness holds with L = L f LQ.We show that this criterion generalizes to the manifold setting but with an important twist: the smoothness of f must be replaced by a new notion we call dual-smoothness .11 Interestingly, L f -dual-smoothness is not in general equivalent to the corresponding notion along geodesics; a simi-lar phenomenon was observed in the context of Riemannian interior-point methods for the notion of self-concordance [HNW23]. We refer to Section 5.3 for details on relative smoothness. We briefly comment on other works that offer Riemannian perspectives on mirror descent. One line of research interprets Euclidean mirror descent as a natural descent algorithm on the Riemannian manifold induced by the distance-generating function. Alvarez et al. [ABB04] pro-pose Hessian Riemannian gradient flow , a natural descent flow on Riemannian manifolds, as a                                   

> 9In fact, we observe that the relative smoothness only needs to hold along the steps actually taken by the algorithm; we formalize this as a natural step-size condition in the body of the paper (see Definition 5.2 and Proposition 5.9 (a) for its connection to relative smoothness). This additional flexibility is essential for our application to quantum functionals: the corresponding pair (f,Q)is not 1-relatively smooth, yet we prove that the step-size condition holds for all η∈(0, 1 ].
> 10 Throughout this paper, “smoothness” refers to the standard notion in convex analysis of Lipschitz-continuity of the gradient (not to differentiability).
> 11 We say that a geodesically convex function fis Lf-dual-smooth if 12∥τ∗
> x→ydf(y)−df(x)∥2≤Lf·DM
> f(x∥y)for all x,y∈ M . In the Euclidean case, this is equivalent to Lf-smoothness; in general it is a more stringent condition.

8continuous-time model of Bregman-based descent algorithms, which essentially correspond to mirror descent [BT03]. For the discrete-time algorithm, Raskutti and Mukherjee [RM15] point out that mirror descent, expressed in dual coordinates, is equivalent to natural gradient descent on the associated Riemannian manifold, a well-known method in information geometry. From a com-plementary perspective, Gunasekar et al. [GWS21] give a primal space interpretation of mirror descent via discretizations of the Hessian Riemannian gradient flow. Jiang et al. [JST26] generalize mirror descent to Riemannian manifolds in another direction: their Riemannian mirror descent , as the name suggests, aims to minimize a geodesically convex objective directly defined on a Rie-mannian manifold. Our framework is distinct from these approaches: Hadamard mirror descent generalizes the dual expression of mirror descent, minimizing an objective of the form Q(d f (x)) .

1.3 Convex optimization on moment polytopes 

As we saw concretely in Section 1.1, the bridge between Eq. (1.14) and convex optimization is given by the Kempf–Ness functions. We now discuss the general setting. Readers interested pri-marily in optimization over the entanglement polytopes of tensors can skip ahead to Section 1.4. Let G ⊆ GL (n) be a connected Zariski-closed subgroup that is self-adjoint, i.e., G† = G. Then, 

P := G ∩ PD (n) inherits from PD (n) the structure of a Hadamard manifold; it is a so-called sym-metric space with nonpositive curvature [Hel78, Hir24]. We call P a Hadamard symmetric space ,following [HNW23]. Its tangent space at the identity group element I ∈ P is naturally identified with the Hermitian part of the Lie algebra, H := Lie G ∩ Herm (n).Consider a rational representation π : G → GL (N), and assume K := G ∩ U(n) acts unitarily. We write g · v := π(g)v for the action of a group element g ∈ G on a vector v ∈ CN . Generalizing Eq. (1.7), the Kempf–Ness function associated with a vector 0 ̸ = v ∈ CN is given by 

fv : P → R, fv(x) = log ⟨v, x · v⟩.This function is geodesically convex on P, and its gradients are captured by the so-called moment map μ : CN \ { 0} → H associated with the action. Concretely, for every x ∈ P, μ(x1/2 · v) is the tan-gent vector dual to τ∗

> I→x

d fv(x), where τI→x : TI P → Tx P denotes parallel transport. A celebrated theorem in symplectic geometry [Kir84, NM84] states that we obtain a convex polytope if we con-sider the moment map image of the orbit of v, apply a suitable K-invariant function s : H → C that maps H into a Euclidean convex cone C ⊆ H called a Weyl chamber , and take the closure. 12 We discuss this construction in more detail in Section 6. The polytope obtained in this way is called the moment polytope of v, and it is denoted by ∆(v) := {s(μ(g · v)) | g ∈ G}.We now consider the problem of convex optimization over the moment polytope: minimize ϕ(p) over p ∈ ∆(v). (1.17) We assume that the objective ϕ appears as a restriction 13 of a K-invariant convex objective Φ : H →

R, so that this can be extended to a holonomy-invariant convex objective Q : T∗ P → R on the cotangent bundle (conversely, any such Q restricts to an objective ϕ). Thus, following the same                   

> 12 In Eq. (1.8), this operation amounted to computing the eigenvalue spectra of the Hermitian matrix tuple, and the Weyl chamber was given by the tuples of sorted vectors: C=Rn1
> ↓× · · · × Rnd
> ↓.
> 13 This condition can be characterized more explicitly: A convex objective on the moment polytope is the restriction of aK-invariant convex function on Hif and only if it extends to a convex function on the Cartan subspace A:=span R(C)
> that is invariant under the so-called Weyl group; see Section 3.2. In the tensor setting of Sections 1.1 and 1.4, we denote this extension by ϕ; it is a convex function on Rn1× · · · × Rndthat is permutation-symmetric in each argument.

9reasoning as in Eqs. (1.9) and (1.10), we see that Eq. (1.17) can be phrased as an instance of the minimization problem (1.14); cf. [Hir25]: min  

> p∈∆(v)

ϕ(p) = inf  

> g∈G

ϕ(s(μ(g · v))) = inf  

> g∈G

Φ(μ(g · v)) = inf  

> x∈P

Q(d fv(x)) .Thus, we can use Hadamard mirror descent to solve convex optimization on the moment poly-tope. While Hadamard mirror descent is formulated on P, it can equivalently be represented by the following simple update of vectors in CN :

vk+1 := e− η   

> 2∇Φ(μ(vk))

· vk, v0 := v. (1.18) This update has an appealing feature: it preserves unitary symmetries, which is often important in applications. For example, if u · v = v for some u ∈ K, then u · vk = vk for all k ∈ N. See Proposition 6.17 for the general result. The gap of the shifted function f ξ 

> v

:= fv + bξ that controls the convergence of Hadamard mir-ror descent can be interpreted as a capacity of the type studied in matrix, operator and tensor scal-ing [FW20]. In the present setting, one can show that it is always finite for suitable ξ. We show that it is polynomially bounded in the input bit-length of vectors with Gaussian integer (or rational) entries, for broad classes of actions of general linear groups. We also show that the Kempf–Ness functions are always D(π)2/2-dual-smooth, where D(π) is a natural complexity parameter called the weight diameter 14 of the action (Definition 6.19). In this way we deduce the following result from our general Theorem 1.1: 

Theorem 1.2 (Convex optimization on moment polytopes, see Theorem 6.14 and Corollary 6.22) .

Let Φ : H → R be a l.s.c. convex function that is K-invariant, differentiable on the interior of its domain, and such that μ(g · v) ∈ int dom Φ for all g ∈ G; let ϕ be its restriction. Under a natural step-size condition (satisfied for η ≤ 2/ (D(π)2 L) if Φ is L-smooth), Hadamard mirror descent (1.18) minimizes ϕ

over the moment polytope ∆(v) at a rate proportional to the inverse iteration count: 

0 ≤ ϕ(s(μ(vk))) − min  

> p∈∆(v)

ϕ(p) = Φ(μ(vk)) − min  

> p∈∆(v)

Φ(p) ≤ O v

 1

ηk



.

The constant in the Ov notation captures the logarithm of the norm and a “capacity” of the input vector v; in typical cases, it is polynomially bounded by its bit-length. 

This establishes that Hadamard mirror descent finds (approximate) minimizers over the moment polytope in a number of steps inversely proportional to the desired accuracy. We note two caveats regarding this result. First, it does not directly yield a polynomial-time algorithm in the Turing model because the iteration (1.18) involves “continuous” operations such as matrix exponentials; this requires a detailed precision analysis which we plan to carry out in future work. Second, it does not encompass fully arbitrary convex optimization problems over moment polytopes, be-cause the K-invariance of Φ is an additional hypothesis. However, we will see in the remainder of this introduction that the theorem applies to many natural convex optimization problems, such as those underlying important tensor parameters. Before considering tensors, we give a simple application of Theorem 1.2 that addresses an open problem in the literature: quantitative convergence for minimization of the ℓ2 or, more precisely, the Frobenius norm ∥X∥F over the moment polytope. Let Φ(X) = ∥X∥2F/2, which is 1-smooth   

> 14 It can be bounded by twice the weight norm of prior work [BFG +19]. We find a similar improvement for the smooth-ness of Kempf–Ness functions; see Section 6.3.

10 and K-invariant. Then, the Q-gradient reduces to the ordinary Riemannian gradient of fv, and the update (1.18) for the step size η = 2/ D(π)2 reads 15 

vk+1 := e− 1   

> D(π)2μ(vk)

· vk, v0 := v. (1.19) Then Theorem 1.2 implies the following result. 

Corollary 1.3 (Norm minimization on the moment polytope, see Theorem 7.1) . The iteration (1.19) 

achieves the following convergence rate, where D (π) is the weight diameter 14 of the representation: 

∥μ(vk)∥2F − min  

> p∈∆(v)

∥p∥2F = Ov

 D(π)2

k



.

The constant in the Ov notation has the same dependence on v as in Theorem 1.2. 

This result improves prior work, which applied only in special cases or did not give quantitative convergence guarantees. Bürgisser et al. [BFG +19] proposed the gradient descent algorithm (1.19) with step size η = 1/ L, where L is any upper bound on the smoothness parameter of fv (we improve their bound on the smoothness parameter in Proposition 6.20); they showed a best-iterate bound of O(k−1) assuming the minimum is zero, which is exactly when fv is bounded below (such v are called semistable ). For the same step sizes, Hirai and Sakabe [HS24] showed that ∥μ(vk)∥2F converges to its infimum even if it is positive, but did not provide a quantitative rate. Our Corollary 1.3 proves a convergence rate of O(k−1) that applies in general, regardless of the value of the optimization problem, for the step size η = 2/ D(π)2 arising from the use of the dual-smoothness of the Kempf–Ness function. We remark that the above also gives an algorithmic proof and interpretation of a widely used semistability criterion by Luna [Lun75, Cor. 2] using conservation of symmetry; see Remark 7.2. 

1.4 Convex optimization on entanglement polytopes of tensors 

We now return to the concrete case of the tensor action. As discussed in Section 1.1, the moment polytopes in this case are known as entanglement polytopes ; they are given concretely by Eq. (1.8). This setting has attracted attention due to its applications in algebraic complexity theory, most notably to tensor rank and the exponent of matrix multiplication, and in quantum information, as discussed earlier in this introduction; hence the development of effective algorithms to optimize over entanglement polytopes is a significant open problem. We can obtain such algorithms from the Hadamard mirror descent framework by specializing the results of the preceding subsection. For the tensor action, G = GL : = GL (n1) × · · · × GL (nd), K = U(n1) × · · · × U(nd), H =

Herm (n1) × · · · × Herm (nd), and π(g1, . . . , gd)T := ( g1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ gd)T; the moment map is given by 

μ :

> dO
> ℓ=1

Cnℓ \ { 0} → H, μ(T) = ( ρ1, . . . , ρd) , where ρℓ := T(ℓ) T(ℓ)†

∥T∥2 . (1.20) Here, we recall that T(ℓ) denotes the ℓ-th flattening of T. In the language of quantum information, the tensor T represents a (pure) quantum state of d particles, and the ρ1, . . . , ρd describe the quan-tum states of the individual particles. The Weyl chamber is given by C = Rn1 

> ↓

× · · · × Rnd 

> ↓

, and the abstract map s : H → C is simply the map spec (·) that sends a tuple of Hermitian matrices to      

> 15 Here we assume that D(π)>0. When D(π) = 0, every group element acts by a scalar multiple of the identity, so the moment polytope is a single point and the algorithmic problem is trivial; moreover, any finite step size is allowed.

11 their ordered eigenvalue spectra, as in Section 1.1. Thus, the entanglement polytopes (1.8) can be written as ∆(T) = {spec (μ(S)) | 0̸ = S ∈ GL ·T}, in agreement with the general formula for the moment polytope given in Section 1.3. Because each ρℓ is positive semidefinite and has trace one, its eigenvalues form a probability distribution. Thus, ∆(T) is a subset of a Cartesian product of probability simplices, as already stated in Section 1.1. Let us consider convex optimization on the entanglement polytope of a tensor T:minimize ϕ(p) over p ∈ ∆(T),where ϕ : Rn1 × · · · × Rnd → R is a convex objective function that is permutation-symmetric in each argument. Such a function extends to a unitarily invariant convex function Φ : H → R and further to a holonomy-invariant convex objective. Then the update (1.18) reads concretely: 

Tk+1 := e− η   

> 2∇Φ(ρ1,..., ρd)

· Tk where (ρ1, . . . , ρd) := μ(Tk), T0 := T. (1.21) The sequence Tk inherits all local unitary symmetries of T (as well as permutation symmetries, for suitable objectives); see Remark 6.18. Since the weight diameter of the tensor action is bounded by 

D(π) ≤ √2d, Theorem 1.1 along with strong capacity bounds implies the following general result: 

Theorem 1.4 (Convex optimization on entanglement polytopes, see Theorems 6.27 and 6.28) . Let 

0̸ = T ∈ Nd 

> ℓ=1

Cnℓ be a tensor. Let ϕ : Rn1 × · · · × Rnd → R be a l.s.c. convex function, permutation-symmetric in each argument and differentiable on the interior of its domain, with spec μ(g · T) ∈ int dom ϕ

for all g ∈ GL . Under a natural step-size condition (satisfied for η ≤ 1/ (dL ) if ϕ is L-smooth), Hadamard mirror descent (1.21) minimizes ϕ over the entanglement polytope ∆(T):

0 ≤ ϕ(spec (μ(Tk))) − min  

> p∈∆(T)

ϕ(p) ≤ O T

 1

ηk



.

When T has Gaussian integer entries, the constant in the OT notation is polynomial in its bit-length. 

This and all tensor results discussed in this subsection apply more generally to tensor tuples, but for clarity of exposition we only discuss the case of single tensors. As a simple example, ℓ2-norm minimization corresponds to the objective ϕ(p) = ∑ℓ ∥pℓ∥2/2. We obtain the following iteration as a special case of (1.19): 

Tk+1 :=

> dO
> ℓ=1

e−ρℓ /(2d)

!

Tk, where (ρ1, . . . , ρd) = μ(Tk), (1.22) with stronger guarantees than previously known (see Corollary 1.3 and the discussion following it). In the remainder, we present applications to paradigmatic tensor parameters: the quantum functionals, the symmetric quantum functional, the G-stable rank, and the non-commutative rank. 

1.4.1 Quantum functionals 

In 1986, Strassen introduced the asymptotic spectrum of tensors to analyze the computational com-plexity of multilinear problems, with the exponent of matrix multiplication as a main motivation [Str86, Str88, Str05]. Central to his theory are universal spectral points —functionals on tensors that are normalized on the unit tensor, monotone under restriction, additive under direct sum and multiplicative under Kronecker product. For decades, constructing non-trivial universal spectral points remained a primary open problem in algebraic complexity theory. 12 Quantum functionals, introduced by Christandl, Vrana, and Zuiddam [CVZ23], provided the first family of non-trivial universal spectral points for tensors over the complex numbers. These functionals are defined via entropy maximization over the entanglement polytope, and they are parameterized by probability distributions θ ∈ Θ := {θ ∈ Rd 

> ≥0

| ∑di=1 θi = 1}. Namely, the 

quantum functional F θ with parameter θ is, for any nonzero tensor T ∈ Nd 

> ℓ=1

Cnℓ , expressed as a maximization problem over the entanglement polytope ∆(T):

Fθ (T) := eEθ (T), Eθ (T) := max  

> p∈∆(T)

Hθ (p), (1.23) where Hθ (p) := Hθ (p1, . . . , pd) := ∑d 

> ℓ=1

θℓ H(pℓ) and H(pℓ) := − ∑nℓ 

> i=1

pℓ,i log pℓ,i is the Shannon entropy ;16 this is natural because the components pℓ are always probability distributions, as ob-served earlier. One also puts Fθ (0) := 0 by convention. The quantity Eθ (T) is called the logarithmic quantum functional . The quantum functionals are known to satisfy Strassen’s axioms of spectral points, namely, they are monotone under restriction, normalized on unit tensors, additive and multiplicative. As a result, they also upper bound the asymptotic subrank. We show that by applying Hadamard mirror descent to the convex objective ϕ = −Hθ , we ob-tain a finite-step descent algorithm for approximating the logarithmic quantum functionals. With-out loss of generality, we may assume that T is concise : each component of μ(T) is nonsingular and hence a positive definite matrix. 17 Then the condition in Theorem 1.4 that spec μ(g · T) ∈ int dom ϕ

for all g ∈ GL is satisfied. The question of step size is more delicate because the negative entropy is not L -smooth for any L > 0. Instead, we directly show that the natural step-size condition in Theorem 1.4 is satisfied for η = 1; this amounts to a novel quantum entropy inequality , which we establish using mathematical techniques from quantum information theory (Theorem 7.5). We now compute the update rule for this step size. The unitarily invariant extension of ϕ is given by 

Φ(ρ) := − ∑d 

> ℓ=1

θℓ H(ρℓ), where H(ρℓ) denotes the von Neumann entropy . We calculate its gradient as (∇Φ(ρ)) ℓ = θℓ(log ρℓ + Inℓ ) for ℓ ∈ [d]. Thus, up to an irrelevant overall scalar, the update (1.21) takes the following form, which we call entropic tensor scaling :

Tk+1 :=

> dO
> ℓ=1

ρ−θℓ /2 

> ℓ

!

Tk, where (ρ1, . . . , ρd) = μ(Tk), T0 := T. (1.24) To the best of our knowledge, entropic tensor scaling provides the first rigorous algorithm to approximate the quantum functionals for arbitrary tensors with a polynomial iteration complexity. This is formalized in the following theorem, obtained from Theorem 1.4 and the discussion above. 

Theorem 1.5 (Quantum functionals, see Theorem 7.6) . Let 0̸ = T ∈ Nd 

> ℓ=1

Cnℓ be a concise tensor and let θ ∈ Θ be a probability distribution. Then, entropic tensor scaling (1.24) , run for k ≥ 1 steps, returns a tensor T k such that 

0 ≤ Eθ (T) − Hθ (spec (μ(Tk))) ≤ O T

 1

k



.

When T has Gaussian integer entries, the constant in the OT notation is polynomial in its bit-length. 

Entropic tensor scaling also provides a new solution to the tensor scaling problem , which ex-plains our terminology. Given a tensor T, this problem asks to find a “scaling” g · T such that spec (μ(g · T)) ≈ (1n1 /n1, . . . , 1nd /nd) whenever this is possible (such tensors are called semistable );       

> 16 In [CVZ23], the entropy was defined using the binary logarithm. Here we use the natural logarithm, so that
> Fθ(T):=eEθ(T)coincides with the original definition of the quantum functionals.
> 17 One can always reduce to this situation efficiently, with only a polynomial increase in the bit-length; see Footnote 43.

13 equivalently, the quantum marginals μ(g · T) ≈ (In1 /n1, . . . , Ind /nd) should be approximately uni-form. This is a natural generalization of the matrix and operator scaling problems, and it finds ap-plications in, e.g., quantum information and tensor networks [VDDM03, AMN +23]. The problem can be solved by a simple alternating minimization algorithm (called tensor scaling ) in the spirit of Sinkhorn’s algorithm; it was proposed in [VDDM03] and analyzed rigorously in [BFG +18]. Be-cause uniform distributions are characterized by having maximum entropy, entropic tensor scal-ing with uniform θ also solves this problem. It offers two advantages over the original method: (1) it preserves not only the tensor’s local unitary but also permutation symmetries between the tensor factors, which is important for applications; (2) it also provides meaningful guarantees for tensors that are unstable , i.e., not semistable (it computes the quantum functional, whose value quantifies the instability). The same advantages hold for the gradient descent method (1.22) (which computes the minimum ℓ2 norm instead of the maximum entropy) using our Corollary 1.3. One can also use Theorem 1.5 to obtain structural insight into the nature of the quantum func-tionals, by using 

Fθ (T) = lim  

> k→∞

eHθ (spec μ(Tk )) (1.25) and the form of the entropic tensor scaling algorithm in Eq. (1.24). For example, we obtain a new direct proof that the quantum functionals are universal spectral points. As discussed in [CVZ23], it follows directly from the definition and the elementary properties of the moment polytope that 

Fθ is monotone, normalized on the unit tensor, super-multiplicative, and super-additive. In con-trast, sub-multiplicativity and sub-additivity are rather more involved. These two properties were proved in [CVZ23] using a representation-theoretic dual description of the moment polytope. Entropic tensor scaling allows us to bypass sophisticated representation-theoretic reasoning and prove the multiplicativity and sub-additivity of Fθ as a direct consequence of Theorem 1.5. Let 

S ∈ Nd 

> ℓ=1

Cmℓ and T ∈ Nd 

> ℓ=1

Cnℓ be two tensors; as discussed, we may assume they are concise. A direct calculation gives (S ⊗ T)(ℓ) = S(ℓ) ⊗ T(ℓ) (∀ℓ ∈ [d]) for the flattenings of S ⊗ T. Hence, 

μ(S ⊗ T) = ( μ(S)1 ⊗ μ(T)1, . . . , μ(S)d ⊗ μ(T)d) ,and we see the entropic tensor scalings (1.24) of S ⊗ T, S, and T are related by (S ⊗ T)k = Sk ⊗ Tk.Consequently, 

Fθ (S ⊗ T) = lim  

> k→∞

eHθ (spec μ(( S⊗T)k )) = lim  

> k→∞

eHθ (spec μ(Sk ))+ Hθ (spec μ(Tk )) = Fθ (S)Fθ (T)

using only Eq. (1.25) and the additivity H(p ⊗ q) = H(p) + H(q) of the Shannon entropy. The proof of sub-additivity works in much the same way; we refer to Theorem 7.8 for all formal details. Two other works have recently given alternative proofs that the quantum functionals are uni-versal spectral points without relying on representation theory. Hirai [Hir25] uses the continuous-time flow and a duality argument; the work [SDW26] shows that the quantum functionals coincide with Strassen’s support functionals (which are naturally sub-multiplicative and sub-additive). 

1.4.2 Symmetric quantum functional 

There is also a symmetric variant of the quantum functionals, called the symmetric quantum func-tional and introduced in [CFTZ22]. It is known to be a spectral point in the asymptotic spectrum of symmetric tensors, that is, it is monotone under symmetric restriction, normalized on the unit ten-sor, and additive and multiplicative on symmetric tensors. For symmetric tensors, the symmetric quantum functional reduces to the ordinary quantum functional (for uniform θ), but in general 14 the two quantities differ. In the following we show that it can be computed by a simple descent algorithm with polynomial iteration complexity, analogous to Section 1.4.1. We briefly sketch the definition of the symmetric quantum functionals and then present our results. The relevant group action is the tensor power action of G = GL (n) on (Cn)⊗d, the space of 

d-tensors with all local dimensions equal to n; this action is given by π(g)T := g⊗d T. Then the moment map computes the sum of the quantum marginals in Eq. (1.20): 

μS : (Cn)⊗d \ { 0} → Herm (n), μS(T) = 

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

ρℓ, where ρℓ := T(ℓ) T(ℓ)†

∥T∥2 .The corresponding moment polytopes are called symmetric entanglement polytopes ; they are given by ∆S(T) = {spec (μS(S)) | 0̸ = S ∈ GL (n) · T}. Their elements are vectors p ∈ Rn 

> ≥0

with 

∑ni=1 pi = d, so division by d results in a probability distribution. The symmetric quantum functional 

is defined by entropy maximization over the distributions thus obtained, in analogy to Eq. (1.23): 

FS(T) := eES(T), ES(T) := max  

> p∈∆S(T)

H(p/d),where H denotes the Shannon entropy ; ES(T) is called the logarithmic symmetric quantum functional .We now show that an application of the Hadamard mirror descent framework provides an algorithm to compute the symmetric quantum functional. Without loss of generality, we may again assume that μS(T) is nonsingular; 18 this holds, for example, if T is concise. Then we obtain from (1.18) the following symmetric entropic tensor scaling algorithm: 

Tk+1 :=



ρ−1/ (2d) 

> avg

⊗ · · · ⊗ ρ−1/ (2d)

> avg



Tk, where ρavg := μS(Tk)

d , T0 := T. (1.26) For symmetric tensors, the above update coincides with the usual entropic tensor scaling (1.24) with uniform weights θ = ( 1/ d, . . . , 1/ d). In general, the two iterations differ: instead of using the individual quantum marginals, symmetric entropic tensor scaling uses their average . However, we find that (1.26) coincides with entropic tensor scaling for a suitable tensor tuple constructed from cyclic shifts of the tensor T, which is useful for the analysis. Our next theorem gives an iteration bound that is polynomial in the input size of the tensor; it yields an approximation for the symmetric quantum functional FS(T) even if T is not symmetric. 

Theorem 1.6 (Symmetric quantum functional, see Theorem 7.10) . Let 0̸ = T ∈ (Cn)⊗d be a d-tensor such that μS(T) is nonsingular. Then symmetric entropic tensor scaling (1.26) , run for k ≥ 1 steps, returns a tensor T k such that 

0 ≤ ES(T) − H(spec (μS(Tk)) /d) ≤ O T

 1

k



.

When T has Gaussian integer entries, the constant in the OT notation is polynomial in its bit-length. 

1.4.3 G-stable rank 

Next, we consider the G-stable rank, a tensor parameter introduced by Derksen [Der22]. It pro-vides, for example, a multiplicative approximation to the slice rank , a notion that has found nu-merous applications from algebraic complexity theory to additive combinatorics [ASU13, Tao16, TS16, BCC +17, KSS18]. The G-stable rank rk G 

> α

(T) of a tensor T is a measure of its instability ; it 

> 18 In analogy with the quantum functionals, one can always reduce to this situation efficiently; see Footnote 48.

15 is given by an optimization over all one-parameter subgroups of GL : = GL (n1) × · · · × GL (nd)

that asymptotically drive T to the zero tensor. It is parameterized by a vector α ∈ Rd

> >0

—the cases 

α = ( 1, . . . , 1 ) and α = ( 1 

> n1

, . . . , 1 

> nd

) are of particular interest due to their connection to slice rank and semistability, respectively [Der22, Props. 4.9 and 2.6]. For tensors over the complex num-bers, the reciprocal of the G-stable rank can be viewed as a convex optimization problem over the entanglement polytope [Der22, Hir25]: 1rk G 

> α

(T) = min  

> p∈∆(T)

max 

> ℓ∈[d]

∥pℓ∥∞

αℓ

= min  

> p∈∆(T)

max  

> ℓ∈[d],i∈[nℓ]

pℓ,i

αℓ

.While the objective ϕ(p) := max ℓ∈[d],i∈[nℓ ] 

> pℓ,i
> αℓ

is a convex function, it is not smooth and also does not satisfy our differentiability hypotheses. Accordingly, we cannot apply Theorem 1.4 directly. Instead, we apply a smoothing technique [Nes06]; we consider a smooth convex function ϕδ which gives an additive approximation to ϕ:

ϕδ(p) − δ log 



∑d 

> ℓ=1

nℓ



≤ ϕ(p) ≤ ϕδ(p);the parameter δ > 0 controls both the approximation and the smoothness of the objective ϕδ. By applying Hadamard mirror descent (1.21) to the smoothed objective ϕδ for sufficiently small δ

and a suitable step size, we obtain an algorithm that computes an estimate ϕδ(spec μ(Tk)) for the inverse of the G-stable rank to any desired additive error. We only state the algorithmic result and refer to Section 7.4 for the precise iteration and choice of step size. 

Theorem 1.7 (G-stable rank, see Theorem 7.12) . Let 0̸ = T ∈ Nd 

> ℓ=1

Cnℓ be a tensor and let α ∈ Rd

> >0

.Then, k = OT (d log (nsum )/(αmin ε)2) iterations of Hadamard mirror descent approximate rk G 

> α

(T)−1 to additive error ε > 0, where n sum := ∑d 

> ℓ=1

nℓ and αmin := min ℓ αℓ. When T has Gaussian integer entries, the constant in the OT notation is polynomial in its bit-length. 

1.4.4 Non-commutative rank 

Let A = ( A1, . . . , Am) be a matrix tuple in (Cn×n)⊕m. The non-commutative rank ncrk (A) is defined as the rank of the corresponding symbolic matrix in non-commuting indeterminates: ncrk (A) := rk (A(x)) , A(x) := x1 A1 + x2 A2 + · · · + xm Am,where rk (A(x)) is the matrix rank over the free skew field C (< x1, x2, . . . , xm >) [Coh95]. See also [GGOW20, Thm. 1.17] and [FSG23, Def. 2.1] for several equivalent definitions and motivations for this fundamental and influential notion. A celebrated result states that the non-commutative rank is computable in deterministic polynomial time, e.g., when the matrix entries are rational numbers encoded in binary [GGOW20, IQS18, HH21]. Here we give a new method for computing the non-commutative rank directly by optimization on a suitable moment polytope. Without loss of generality, we may assume that A satisfies the following kernel condition (see Section 7.5): 

> \
> i∈[m]

ker Ai = {0} or \

> i∈[m]

ker A† 

> i

= {0}. (1.27) Then the non-commutative rank admits a formula as a convex optimization problem over the moment polytope, as recently proved by Hirai [Hir25, Hir26]: 2

n (n − ncrk (A)) = min  

> p∈∆LR (A)

ϕ(p), where ϕ(p) := p1 − 1n

n 1

+ p2 − 1n

n 1

.16 Here, ∆LR (A) denotes the moment polytope of the matrix tuple A with respect to the left-right action of GL (n) × GL (n). This is a special case of the tensor action on tensor tuples ; see Section 7.5. Unfortunately, as in the case of the G-stable rank, the convex objective ϕ is not smooth, but we can again construct, for every δ > 0, a natural smoothing ϕδ that provides an additive approximation: 

ϕδ(p) − 2nδ ≤ ϕ(p) ≤ ϕδ(p).Hence, by applying Hadamard mirror descent to ϕδ for sufficiently small δ and for a suitable step size, we can approximate ncrk (A) to arbitrarily small additive error. Since ncrk (A) is always an integer, this suffices to compute it exactly by rounding. In this way we obtain the following theorem. For concreteness, here we only state it for matrix tuples with Gaussian integer entries: 

Theorem 1.8 (Non-commutative rank, see Theorem 7.14) . Let A be an m-tuple of n × n matrices with Gaussian integer entries that satisfies the kernel condition (1.27) . Then, ncrk (A) can be computed using 

poly (n, ⟨A⟩ ) iterations of Hadamard mirror descent applied to the smoothed objective ϕδ on the moment polytope ∆LR (A), with suitable choices of δ and η, followed by rounding, where ⟨A⟩ denotes the bit-length. 

Concretely, the Hadamard mirror descent iterations for the matrix tuples Ak = ( A(k) 

> 1

, . . . , A(k) 

> m

) read 

A(k+1) 

> i

:= e− δ  

> 4σL

(σ2  

> L+δ2I

)− 12

A(k) 

> i

e− δ  

> 4σR

(σ2  

> R+δ2I

)− 12

, σL :=

> m

# ∑   

> j=1
> A(k)
> jA(k)†
> j
> ∥A k∥2

− In , σR :=

> m

# ∑   

> j=1
> A(k)†
> jA(k)
> j
> ∥A k∥2

− In ,where δ = 1/ (2n2), corresponding to the step size η = δ/2. Our algorithm can be viewed as a conceptual descendant of the operator-scaling-based ap-proach in [GGOW20], but it directly computes ncrk (A), whereas the algorithm in [GGOW20] operates by reduction to the decision problem ncrk (A) ≥ r. See the discussion after Theorem 7.14 for a comparison between the algorithms in [IQS18, HH21] and our algorithm. 

1.5 Organization of the paper 

In Section 2, we collect preliminary results about Hadamard manifolds and the Riemannian ge-ometry of positive definite matrices and Hadamard symmetric spaces obtained from self-adjoint subgroups. In Section 3, we introduce the concept of holonomy-invariant convex objectives which we seek to minimize over the gradient set of geodesically convex functions on Hadamard manifolds, and give several key examples. We also introduce Hirai’s Q-gradient, whose negative provides a natural descent direction. Section 4 analyzes the Hadamard mirror flow —the natural descent flow defined by the negative Q-gradient. We give an interpretation in terms of mirror flow and ex-tend Hirai’s result by proving a general O(t−1) convergence rate. In Section 5, we introduce and analyze Hadamard mirror descent —the discretization of the Hadamard mirror flow—and demon-strate that it generalizes Euclidean mirror descent. Furthermore, we discuss a natural step-size condition that yields a O(k−1) convergence rate, and we show that this condition follows from a natural and easy-to-verify notion of relative smoothness. In Section 6, we apply Hadamard mir-ror descent to convex optimization on moment polytopes . We discuss Kempf–Ness function and show that Hadamard mirror descent using Kempf–Ness functions allows us to optimize convex objectives on the moment polytope. We also give a capacity-based lower bound that controls the constant in the convergence bound of Hadamard mirror descent. We also specialize this discus-sion to convex optimization on the entanglement polytopes of (tuples of) tensors, as well as to the moment polytopes of homogeneous polynomial actions of the general linear group. In Section 7, we explore various applications of these general results, such as computing (ordinary and sym-metric) quantum functionals, G-stable ranks, and non-commutative ranks, and we also obtain a 17 new convergence result for norm minimization on moment polytopes. In Appendix A, we formal-ize matrix scaling as marginal entropy maximization. Although this is an example of Euclidean mirror descent, it serves as a simple illustration of how scaling problems can be treated in our framework. Appendix B contains some technical proofs omitted from the main part of the paper. 

# 2 Preliminaries 

In this paper, we write [n] := {1, 2, . . . , n} and Sn for the symmetric group. We let C× := C \ { 0}.We denote the extended real line by R := R ∪ { ∞}. We write Rn 

> ↓

:= {(x1, . . . , xn) ∈ Rn | x1 ≥· · · ≥ xn} for the closed convex cone of vectors with entries sorted in nonincreasing order. Let V be a finite-dimensional complex vector space. We denote by L (V ) the space of linear endomorphisms, by GL (V ) ⊆ L(V ) the general linear group, and by SL (V ) ⊆ GL (V ) the special linear group. Now suppose V carries a Hermitian inner product. For an operator X ∈ L(V ), we write X†

for the adjoint, ∥X∥F := ( tr X† X)1/2 for the Frobenius norm , which is induced by the Hilbert– Schmidt inner product (X, Y) 7 → tr X†Y, and ∥X∥tr := tr √X† X for the trace norm (also called nuclear norm); the operator norm (or spectral norm) is denoted ∥X∥op = max ∥v∥=1∥Xv ∥. We let U(V ) ⊆ GL (V ) denote the unitary group, Herm (V ) ⊆ L(V ) the Hermitian endomorphisms of V,PSD (V ) ⊆ Herm (V ) the positive-semidefinite operators, and PD (V ) ⊆ PSD (V ) the positive-definite ones. For A, B ∈ Herm (V ), we write A ⪰ B if A − B is positive semidefinite and A ≻ B

if A − B is positive definite. We abbreviate GL (n) := GL (Cn), U (n) := U(Cn), and so forth. We write I for identity operators and matrices. The above-mentioned groups naturally admit a Lie group structure. We denote by Lie G the Lie algebra of a Lie group G.

2.1 Hadamard manifolds 

Throughout, let M be a Hadamard manifold : a complete and simply connected Riemannian man-ifold with nonpositive sectional curvature; we refer the reader to [Sak96, §V.4] and [BH99, II] for an introduction to Hadamard manifolds. Let d (·, ·) denote the distance induced by the Rieman-nian metric of M. Any two points x, y ∈ M are connected by a unique geodesic; its length is equal to d (x, y). A real-valued function on M is said to be geodesically convex if it is convex along any geodesic. We write τγ,s→t for the parallel transport along a parameterized curve γ from γ(s)

to γ(t), and τx→y : Tx M → TyM for the parallel transport of tangent vectors along the unique geodesic from x to y. Then the dual maps τ∗ 

> γ,s→t

: T∗

> γ(t)

M → T∗

> γ(s)

M and τ∗ 

> y→x

: T∗ 

> x

M → T∗ 

> y

M

describe the parallel transport of cotangent vectors. Parallel transport along closed loops is in general nontrivial due to the manifold’s curvature. This is captured by the holonomy groups 19 

Hol x (M) := {τγ,0 →1 ∈ SO (Tx M) | γ : [0, 1 ] → M piecewise smooth, γ(0) = γ(1) = x},which act on TxM and T∗ 

> x

M. We call two geodesic rays (not necessarily of unit speed) γ(t) :=

exp x (tv ), β(t) := exp y(tu ) asymptotic if d (γ(t), β(t)) remains bounded for t → ∞. This defines an equivalence relation on the set of all geodesic rays, denoted γ ∼ β. Let CM∞ denote the set of equivalence classes. For any x ∈ M , the natural map TxM → CM∞, u 7 → [t 7 → exp x(tu )] 

is a bijection, identifying CM∞ with Tx M. There is a natural norm on CM∞ by defining ∥ξ∥ :=

∥ ˙γ∥ ≡ ∥ u∥ for any geodesic ray γ(t) = exp x(tu ) in the equivalence class ξ ∈ CM∞. For a geodesic ray γ(t), we define the (unnormalized) Busemann function bγ : M → R, bγ(x) := lim 

> t→∞

 ∥ ˙γ∥ d(γ(t), x) − ∥ ˙γ∥2t,  

> 19 Because Mis simply connected, the restricted and the full holonomy groups coincide.

18 which is geodesically convex and ∥ ˙γ∥-Lipschitz continuous. Its differential on γ is given by dbγ(γ(t)) = −♭( ˙γ(t)) , (2.1) where ♭ : TM → T∗M is the natural isomorphism induced by the Riemannian metric [HI77, Prop. 3.1]. For ξ = [ γ] ∈ CM∞, we also define bξ := bγ, but we caution that this is well-defined only up to an additive constant. In particular, the differential d bξ , differences bξ (x) − bξ (y), and the boundedness and minimizers of functions f + bξ are still well-defined. 

2.2 Positive-definite matrices 

An important example of a Hadamard manifold is PD (n), the set of n × n Hermitian positive defi-nite matrices, equipped with the so-called affine-invariant Riemannian metric. To define the latter, we use that PD (n) is an open subset of Herm (n), and hence at every point we can canonically iden-tify the tangent space Tx PD (n) ∼= Herm (n); then the affine-invariant Riemannian metric is given by the formula (X, Y)x := tr [x−1Xx −1Y], so ∥X∥x = ∥x−1/2 Xx −1/2 ∥F. The exponential map on PD (n)

reads exp x (Z) = x1/2 ex−1/2 Zx −1/2 

x1/2 , its inverse is given by log x (y) = x1/2 log (x−1/2 yx −1/2 )x1/2 

(in particular, exp I and log I are the matrix exponential and logarithm, respectively), and the dis-tance between two points x, y ∈ PD (n) is given by d (x, y) = ∥log x(y)∥x = ∥log (x−1/2 yx −1/2 )∥F.Note that x 7 → gxg † is an isometry of PD (n) for any g ∈ GL (n). The parallel transport of tangent vectors along the geodesic from the identity I to x ∈ PD (n) is given by τI→x (X) = x1/2 Xx 1/2 .More generally, the parallel transport of tangent vectors along the geodesic from x to y is given by 

τx→y(X) = x1/2 (x−1/2 yx −1/2 )1/2 x−1/2 Xx −1/2 (x−1/2 yx −1/2 )1/2 x1/2 , and its dual map τ∗ 

> x→y

gives the parallel transport of cotangent vectors along the geodesic from y to x.

2.3 Hadamard symmetric spaces and self-adjoint subgroups 

We obtain a broad class of Hadamard manifolds, which we call Hadamard symmetric spaces, by intersecting PD (n) with a self-adjoint subgroup of GL (n). A Zariski-closed subgroup G ⊆ GL (n)

is said to be self-adjoint if G† = G, i.e., g† ∈ G for every g ∈ G. This notion goes back to [Mos55] and provides a concrete model for complex reductive algebraic groups; see [Wal17, §2.2] and [BFG +19] for an introduction (where such subgroups are called symmetric ). For example, GL (n), SL (n), and the subgroups of diagonal matrices in these are all self-adjoint subgroups, as are their products (see, e.g., Example 2.1 below). If G ⊆ GL (n) is a self-adjoint subgroup, the positive definite elements P := G ∩ PD (n) form a totally geodesic submanifold of PD (n) [Wal17, Thm. 2.12]. In fact, it is a special kind of Hadamard manifold: a symmetric space with nonpositive curvature [Hel78, Hir24, HNW23]. We will call P a

Hadamard symmetric space , following [HNW23]. Since P ⊆ PD (n) is a totally geodesic submanifold, the exponential map and parallel transport on P match those in PD (n), and hence they are given by the formulae presented in Section 2.2. Let K := G ∩ U(n), a maximal compact subgroup of G.Then P ∼= G/K because K is the stabilizer of I ∈ P under the transitive action of G on P given by g · x := gxg †. Under our canonical identification TI PD (n) ∼= Herm (n), the tangent space at the identity identifies with the Hermitian elements in the Lie algebra: TI P ∼= H := i Lie K =

Lie G ∩ Herm (n). Using the Riemannian metric, which at I ∈ P is simply the Hilbert–Schmidt inner product, we can also identify T∗ 

> I

P ∼= TI P, hence T∗ 

> I

P ∼= H. In this paper, we consider only 

connected self-adjoint subgroups; their maximal compact subgroups are also connected [Wal17, 19 Thm. 2.16]. Then, identifying TI P ∼= H, the holonomy group acts by the adjoint action of K:20 

Hol I (P) = {H ∋ X 7 → uXu † ∈ H | u ∈ K}.Choose a maximal commuting subspace A ⊆ H; this is called a Cartan subspace . Every adjoint orbit {uXu † | u ∈ K} intersects A; see [Wal17, Cor. 2.20]. In general, this intersection contains more than one element, but it is always finite, as we will discuss now. Define the Weyl group as 

W := NK (A)/ZK (A), where NK (A) := {u ∈ K | uAu† = A} is the normalizer and ZK (A) :=

{u ∈ K | uXu † = X (∀X ∈ A)} the centralizer of A. The Weyl group acts naturally on A: we write w · X for this action, which is induced by the adjoint action of K. Then there is a bijection between the K-orbits in H and the W-orbits in A: for any X ∈ A, we have {uXu † | u ∈ K} ∩ 

A = W · X [Wal17, Prop. 3.61]. Remarkably, the Weyl group is finite [Wal17, Cor. 3.60], hence this intersection is finite. In fact, it is a finite reflection group, so one can always choose as a fundamental domain a closed, convex cone C ⊆ A called a (closed) Weyl chamber . Thus, every Weyl group orbit and hence every adjoint orbit {uXu † | u ∈ K} intersects the Weyl chamber C in a single point, which we denote by s(X). This defines a continuous surjection s : H → C.We now describe these notions concretely in the following important example. 

Example 2.1. The group GL (n1) × · · · × GL (nd) can be naturally regarded as a subgroup of GL (N),where N := n1 + · · · + nd, via the block-diagonal embedding. As such, it is clearly Zariski-closed and self-adjoint. In this case, we have P = PD (n1) × · · · × PD (nd) ⊆ PD (N), K = U(n1) × · · · × U(nd) ⊆

U(N), and H = Herm (n1) × · · · × Herm (nd) ⊆ Herm (N). We take as a Cartan subspace the tuples of diagonal Hermitian matrices: A = diag (Rn1 ) × · · · × diag (Rnd ) ⊆ H. The Weyl group can be identified with the tuples of permutation matrices: W ∼= Sn1 × · · · × Snd . This reflects the fact that two diagonal matrices are conjugate under U(n) if and only if their diagonal entries are permutations of each other. Hence, we can choose as a Weyl chamber C = diag (Rn1 

> ↓

) × · · · × diag (Rnd 

> ↓

) ⊆ A. Then, the map s : H → C sends a tuple of Hermitian matrices to the tuple of diagonal matrices in the Weyl chamber with the same spectra. In other words, s = ( diag, . . . , diag ) ◦ spec , where spec : H → Rn1 

> ↓

× · · · × Rnd 

> ↓

sends a tuple of Hermitian matrices to their spectra, with the eigenvalues listed in nonincreasing order. 

We end this section with a lemma about asymptotic geodesic rays in P.

Lemma 2.2. Any geodesic ray t 7 → g†etX g (where g ∈ G, X ∈ H) on P is asymptotic to t 7 → etu † Xu for some u ∈ K. 

The proof of the lemma can be found in Appendix B. 

# 3 Holonomy-invariant objectives and generalized gradients 

In this section, we recall Hirai’s notion of Q-gradient in a slight variant of his setup [Hir25]. The context is the problem of minimizing Q(d f ), where f is a geodesically convex function on a Hadamard manifold, and Q is an objective function on the cotangent bundle. Roughly speaking, 

Q should be convex on each cotangent space and invariant under holonomies; we define the pre-cise conditions in Section 3.1. Then, under suitable regularity assumptions, a generalized gradient                           

> 20 In general, the holonomy group at the identity Hol I(P)is a Lie group whose Lie algebra is given by the adjoint action of [Lie K, Lie K]⊆Lie K; see [Sak96, III (6.7), IV Prop. 6.7 and Thm. 6.9]. For the compact Lie group K, its Lie algebra decomposes as a direct sum Lie K= [ Lie K, Lie K]⊕zof its semisimple part and center. Thus, the adjoint action of [Lie K, Lie K]coincides with the adjoint action of Lie K, and it follows that Hol I(P)is given by the adjoint action of the identity component of K, which, for connected K, is all of K.

20 called the Q-gradient of f can be defined so that Q(d f ) is nonincreasing under the corresponding flow; see Section 3.3. 21 Throughout this section, M denotes a Hadamard manifold. 

3.1 Holonomy-invariant convex objectives 

We consider the following class of objectives. 

Definition 3.1 (Holonomy-invariant convex objective) . A holonomy-invariant convex objective is a function Q : T∗M → R on the cotangent bundle satisfying the following properties: (Q1) For every x ∈ M , its restriction Q x := Q|T∗  

> xM

is a lower-semicontinuous (l.s.c.) and Euclidean convex function on the cotangent space T ∗ 

> x

M.(Q2) Q is invariant under parallel transport in the following sense: for every piecewise smooth curve 

γ : [0, 1 ] → M , we have Q γ(1) = Qγ(0) ◦ τ∗

> γ,0 →1

.To later define an associated gradient (as opposed to subgradient) notion, we further require: (Q3) For every x ∈ M , dom Qx := {α ∈ T∗ 

> x

M | Qx (α) < ∞} has a nonempty interior, and Q x is differentiable on int dom Qx.Such an objective is called L -smooth if its restrictions Q x are L-smooth, i.e., if each Q x is finite-valued and its differential is L-Lipschitz continuous with respect to the Riemannian metric and its dual norm. 22 

The name holonomy-invariant originates from the following observation: By property (Q2), Q is uniquely defined by its restriction Qx to the cotangent space at an arbitrary point x ∈ M and, moreover, invariant under the dual action of the holonomy group Hol x (M). Conversely, if for an arbitrary fixed x ∈ M one has a function Qx : T∗ 

> x

M → R that satisfies the following conditions, then it must be the restriction of a unique holonomy-invariant convex objective: (Qx1) Qx is l.s.c. and convex. (Qx2) Qx is invariant under the holonomy group: Qx = Qx ◦ h∗ for any h ∈ Hol x (M).(Qx3) dom Qx has a nonempty interior and Qx is differentiable on int dom Qx.Concretely, its extension Q : T∗M → R can be defined by Qy := Qx ◦ τ∗

> x→y

. Moreover, Q is L-smooth if and only if this is the case for its restriction Qx at an arbitrary point x ∈ M .

Example 3.2. For any Hadamard manifold M, we can take Q = 12 ∥·∥ 2, with ∥·∥ the dual norm on the cotangent bundle induced by the Riemannian metric. In this case, Q is 1-smooth, and the Q-gradient defined in Definition 3.10 below coincides with the ordinary Riemannian gradient. 

Example 3.3. If M = Rn is a Euclidean space, we can identify all tangent spaces with Rn, and parallel transport is trivial; thus (Q2) simply requires all Q x to be the same. Thus a holonomy-invariant convex objective is parameterized by a single convex function Q : (Rn)∗ → R. After identifying Rn with its dual, we obtain a function ϕ : Rn → R, as in Section 1. See also Example 3.9 below. 

We end this subsection with the following observation: properties (Q1) and (Q2) imply that if we evaluate Q on the differential of a Busemann function, the function value is independent of the point on M.                                                        

> 21 The main difference between our setup and that of [Hir25] is as follows: Hirai considers the problem of minimizing
> Q(df), but defines the associated Q-gradient using Q2/2 instead of Q. Since he additionally assumes that Qis nonneg-ative (“norm-like”), minimizing Qand Q2/2 are equivalent. Our Qplays the role of his Q2/2, which we find slightly more convenient. In particular, we do not require that Qis nonnegative.
> 22 The differential of Qx:T∗
> xM → Rat a point α∈int dom Qxcan be identified with a tangent vector: d Qx(α)∈
> T∗
> α(T∗
> xM)∼=TxM. Then Qxis L-smooth iff dom Qx=T∗
> xMand ∥dQx(α)−dQx(β)∥x≤L∥α−β∥∗
> xfor all α,β∈T∗
> xM.

21 Lemma 3.4. Let Q : T∗M → R be a function that satisfies (Q1) and (Q2). Then for any pair of asymptotic geodesic rays exp x (tu ) ∼ exp y(tv ) we have Q x(♭u) = Qy(♭v), where ♭ : TM → T∗M is the isomor-phism induced by the Riemannian metric. Hence, for ξ ∈ CM∞ and b ξ an associated Busemann function, Q(ξ) := Qx (−dbξ (x)) (3.1) 

is well-defined (i.e., independent of the choice of x). 

We prove Lemma 3.4 in Appendix B. 

Example 3.5. To justify the “Q (ξ)” notation, consider the case of M = P := G ∩ PD (n). As T I P = H,every geodesic ray is asymptotic to one of the form t 7 → etX (X ∈ H), and hence each equivalence class 

ξ ∈ CP ∞ is represented by such a geodesic; this leads to a natural identification CP ∞ ∼= H. Under this identification, Q (ξ) equals Φ(X) (where Φ is defined in the next subsection), which justifies the notation. 

3.2 Objectives on Hadamard symmetric spaces 

We now specialize the discussion to the Hadamard manifolds obtained from a connected self-adjoint subgroup G ⊆ GL (n). Recall from Section 2.3 that the symmetric space P := G ∩ PD (n) is a Hadamard manifold. We also saw that the cotangent space at the identity element is canonically identified with H := Lie G ∩ Herm (n), with the action of the holonomy group corresponding to the adjoint action of K := G ∩ U(n). Thus, holonomy-invariant objectives can be specified by functions Φ : H → R satisfying the following conditions, which are obtained by translating ( Qx1)– (Qx3): (Φ1) Φ is l.s.c. and convex. (Φ2) Φ is K-invariant: Φ(uXu †) = Φ(X) for all u ∈ K and X ∈ H.(Φ3) dom Φ has a nonempty interior and Φ is differentiable on int dom Φ.The function Φ coincides with QI under the identification H ∼= T∗ 

> I

P.By condition ( Φ2), Φ is uniquely determined by its restriction to a Weyl chamber, and any func-tion on a Weyl chamber extends to a unique function Φ satisfying ( Φ2). However, if we start with a convex function on the Weyl chamber, its extension will not in general be convex. For example, if P = PD (n) then H = Herm (n), and a Weyl chamber is given by C ∼= Rn 

> ↓

. Thus, x 7 → − x1 is a convex (even linear) function on C, but its extension to Herm (n) is given by Φ(X) = −λmax (X),which is non-convex for n ≥ 2. In fact, the obstruction to convexity can already be seen by con-sidering diagonal matrices or, equivalently, real vectors (the function x 7 → − max {x1, . . . , xn} is nonconvex on Rn). This observation is general: if, instead, we start with a convex Weyl-group invariant function on the entire Cartan subspace, then its extension will always be convex. We will now formalize and prove this observation. Consider the restriction ϕ := Φ|A of a function Φ : H → R to the Cartan subspace. Then, the conditions ( Φ1)–( Φ3) on Φ respectively imply conditions on ϕ as follows: (ϕ1) ϕ is l.s.c. and convex. (ϕ2) ϕ is invariant under the Weyl group: ϕ(w · X) = ϕ(X) for all X ∈ A and w ∈ W.(ϕ3) dom ϕ has a nonempty interior and ϕ is differentiable on int dom ϕ.Furthermore, if Φ is L-smooth, then so is ϕ.Conversely, given a function ϕ satisfying these properties, we can always extend it to a func-tion Φ satisfying the corresponding properties, and the smoothness parameter is also preserved. 22 This is the content of the following proposition. Its proof draws on the general results of [Lew96b]. 23 

Proposition 3.6. Let ϕ : A → R be a function that satisfies ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3). Define its K-invariant extension 

Φ : H → R by Φ(X) := ϕ(s(X)) . Then: (a) The function Φ satisfies ( Φ1)–( Φ3), and hence it determines a holonomy-invariant convex objective Q. (b) Furthermore, s −1(int dom ϕ) = int dom Φ, and the gradient of Φ at any X ∈ int dom Φ can be computed as follows: ∇Φ(X) = u†∇ϕ(uXu †)u for any u ∈ K such that uXu † ∈ A.(c) If ϕ is additionally L-smooth, then Φ is L-smooth, and hence so is Q. Proof. (a) Property ( Φ2) holds by definition of Φ, because s is constant on adjoint orbits. Because 

ϕ is Weyl group invariant, ϕ is convex if and only if Φ is convex, and ϕ is l.s.c. if and only if Φ is l.s.c., by [Lew96b, Thm. 4.3]. Thus, ( ϕ1) and ( ϕ2) imply property ( Φ1). Now, s−1(dom ϕ) = dom Φ.Because dom ϕ is Weyl group invariant, it follows that s−1(int dom ϕ) = int dom Φ by [Lew96b, Thm. 5.4 (iii)]. This implies that dom Φ has nonempty interior; this is because the interior of dom ϕ

is nonempty and Weyl group invariant, hence it meets the Weyl chamber C, and s is surjective onto C. Moreover, we obtain that Φ is differentiable on int dom Φ. This follows from the preceding and [Lew96b, Thm. 6.1], which states that if a convex and Weyl group invariant function ϕ is differentiable at s(X), then Φ is differentiable at X. Thus, ( ϕ1), ( ϕ2) and ( ϕ3) imply property ( Φ3). (b) We already proved the statement about the interiors of the domains. The formula for the gradient follows from [Lew96b, Thm. 6.1], which states it in the special case where uXu † ∈ C; the general case follows from the W-invariance of ϕ, which implies that ∇ϕ is W-equivariant. (c) The convex function ϕ is L-smooth iff L∥·∥ 2F/2 − ϕ(·) is convex. By applying part (a) to 

L∥·∥ 2F/2 − ϕ(·), we see that L∥·∥ 2F/2 − Φ(·) is convex. This implies that Φ is also L-smooth. Despite its simple proof, part (c) seems little known even in the case of PD (n). For instance, it appears that the smoothness analysis of functions of matrices in [Nes06, §2] could be simplified by using this property in the case of the Frobenius norm. We specialize the above to the important symmetric space of positive definite matrix tuples. 

Example 3.7. Consider the Hadamard symmetric space P = PD (n1) × · · · × PD (nd), as in Example 2.1. Then, holonomy-invariant convex objectives Q are parameterized by functions Φ : Herm (n1) × · · · × 

Herm (nd) → R satisfying the following properties: (Φ1) Φ is l.s.c. and convex. (Φ2) Φ is unitarily invariant: Φ(u1X1u†1, . . . ud Xdu†

> d

) = Φ(X1, . . . , Xd) for all u ℓ ∈ U(nℓ) and X ℓ ∈

Herm (nℓ).(Φ3) dom Φ has a nonempty interior and Φ is differentiable on int dom Φ.Clearly, such functions are uniquely determined by their behavior on the Weyl chamber C, which consists of tuples of diagonal matrices with nonincreasing diagonal entries. Proposition 3.6 gives a useful characterization in terms of their restriction to the Cartan subspace A,which consists of all tuples of diagonal matrices. Identifying A ∼= Rn1 × · · · × Rnd and using the fact that the Weyl group acts by independent permutations of each block, we arrive at the following characterization: holonomy-invariant convex objectives are parameterized by functions ϕ : Rn1 × · · · × Rnd → R such that                 

> 23 Lewis considers the abstract setting of “normal decomposition systems”—in our case (H,K,s), where Kacts by conjugation, and (A,W,s|A). He explicitly discusses the case of real semisimple groups in [Lew96b, §4]; in particular, this applies when our Gis complex semisimple, viewed as a real group. The complex reductive case follows by splitting off the center, on which Kacts trivially; alternatively, it follows from the compact Lie group case discussed in [Tam99, Ex. 1.3], as noted in [Lew00, remark following Prop. 3.4]. The important case H=Herm (n)is also treated in [Lew96a].

23 (ϕ1) ϕ is l.s.c. and convex. (ϕ2) ϕ is symmetric in each argument: ϕ(P1 p1, . . . , Pd pd) = ϕ(p1, . . . , pd) for all p ℓ ∈ Rnℓ and all permutation matrices P ℓ.(ϕ3) dom ϕ has a nonempty interior and ϕ is differentiable on int dom ϕ.Furthermore, the corresponding objective Q is L-smooth if and only if ϕ is L-smooth. 

We now give some concrete examples of holonomy-invariant convex objectives on PD (n),which form the building blocks of the objectives underlying our main applications. 

Example 3.8. Let M = PD (n). By Example 3.7, we can define holonomy-invariant convex objectives in terms of functions ϕ : Rn → R. We give three examples (for each, it is clear that ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3) hold) along with their unitarily invariant extensions Φ : Herm (n) → R:(a) The (negative) Shannon entropy and its unitarily invariant extension, the (negative) von Neu-mann entropy (by common convention denoted by the same symbol): 

−H(x) :=

(

∑nj=1 xj log xj if x ∈ Rn

> ≥0

,

∞ otherwise, − H(X) :=

(

tr [X log X] if X ⪰ 0, 

∞ otherwise, with the usual convention that 0 log 0 = 0.(b) For any fixed δ > 0, the functions 

ϕδ(x) := δ log 

> n

# ∑

> j=1

exj /δ, Φδ(X) := δ log tr eX/δ

provide smooth approximations to the ℓ∞-norm on the nonnegative orthant and to the operator norm on the positive semidefinite matrices, respectively. (c) For any fixed δ > 0, the functions 

ϕδ(x) :=

> n

# ∑

> j=1

q xj − 1

> n

2 + δ2, Φδ(X) := tr 

s

X − In

2

+ δ2 Iprovide smooth approximations to the ℓ1-distance to the uniform distribution and to the trace-norm distance to the normalized identity, respectively. These objectives are used as building blocks for the quantum functionals (Sections 7.2 and 7.3), the G-stable rank (Section 7.4) and the non-commutative rank (Section 7.5), respectively. 

Example 3.9. The Euclidean setting also arises as a special case of the setup of this section. Let G :=

diag (( C×)n) ⊆ GL (n) denote the group of invertible diagonal matrices, a Zariski-closed self-adjoint sub-group. Then P = diag (Rn

> >0

). We can identify P with Rn

> >0

, with the log-Euclidean metric d(x, y) = 

∥log x − log y∥2 =

q

∑nj=1(log xj − log yj)2, and further with the Euclidean space Rn (using the en-trywise logarithm). Thus, H ∼= Rn. Since G is commutative, A = H, Φ = ϕ, and the adjoint action and Weyl group are trivial; hence ( Φ2) and ( ϕ2) are vacuous. Thus we see that objectives are specified by functions ϕ : Rn → R satisfying conditions ( ϕ1) and ( ϕ3); we have recovered Example 3.3. 

24 3.3 Generalized gradient 

The goal of this paper is to solve minimization problems of the following kind: minimize Q(d f (x)) over x ∈ M , (3.2) where f is a geodesically convex function and Q is an objective as above. We recall the central notion introduced by Hirai. 21 

Definition 3.10 (Q-gradient, [Hir25]) . Let Q : T∗M → R be a holonomy-invariant convex objective and let f : M → R be a continuously differentiable geodesically convex function such that d f (x) ∈

int dom Qx for all x ∈ M . The Q -gradient of f is the continuous vector field, denoted ∇Q f , and defined as follows: 

∇Q f (x) := d(Qx )( d f (x)) ∈ T∗∗  

> x

M ∼= Tx M (x ∈ M ). (3.3) Note that d (Qx) is a covector field on int dom Qx ⊆ V := T∗ 

> x

M, hence d (Qx )( d f (x)) ∈ T∗  

> df(x)

V;because T∗  

> df(x)

V ∼= V∗ ∼= T∗∗  

> x

M ∼= Tx M, this can be canonically identified with a tangent vector in TxM.The following lemma reveals the fundamental nature of this definition: by the geodesic con-vexity of f , the negative Q-gradient provides a natural candidate descent direction for prob-lem (3.2). 

Lemma 3.11 (cf. [Hir25, Lem. 3.9]) . Let Q and f be as in Definition 3.10, with f twice differentiable. For any continuously differentiable curve x t in M, we have 

ddt Q(d f (xt)) = ∇2 f (xt)[ ˙xt, ∇Q f (xt)] .

In other words: 

d(Q ◦ d f )( x) = ∇2 f (x)[ ·, ∇Q f (x)] (x ∈ M ).

Proof. We recall the argument in the proof of [Hir25, Lemma 3.9]. We have dds s=t Q(d f (xs)) = dds s=t Qxt (τ∗

> x•,t→s

d f (xs)) = d(Qxt )( d f (xt))[ ∇ ˙xt d f ]= ( ∇ ˙xt d f )[ ∇Q f (xt)] = ( ∇d f )( xt)[ ˙xt, ∇Q f (xt)] = ∇2 f (xt)[ ˙xt, ∇Q f (xt)] ,where the first equality follows from property (Q2) (the invariance of Q under parallel transport), the second from the chain rule and the definition of the covariant derivative, the third uses the def-inition of the Q-gradient (Eq. (3.3)) along with the identification Txt M ∼= T∗∗  

> xt

M, and we conclude by rewriting using the definition of the covariant derivative and Hessian. We end this section with a regularity lemma that will be used below. We omit its proof, which is standard. 

Lemma 3.12. Let f and Q be as in Definition 3.10. Suppose that f is twice continuously differentiable on M and that Q x is twice continuously differentiable on int dom Qx for every (equivalently, some) x ∈M. Then the Q-gradient ∇Q f is a continuously differentiable vector field. In particular, it is locally Lipschitz. 

Example 3.13. In the Euclidean setting, where M = Rn, we can regard Q as a function Q : (Rn)∗ → R,or equivalently ϕ : Rn → R, as discussed in Example 3.9. Then the Q-gradient is simply 

∇Q f (x) = dQ(d f (x)) = ∇ϕ(∇ f (x)) , (3.4) 

where we interpret the differential d f (x) as an element of T ∗ 

> x

M ∼= ( Rn)∗, and ∇ f and ∇ϕ are the usual Euclidean gradients. See also the discussion in Section 1. 

25 4 Hadamard mirror flow 

In this section, we study the descent flow associated to the Q-gradient, first defined by Hirai, who also proved that Q(d f ) is monotonically nonincreasing along the flow [Hir25]. We recall his definition in Section 4.1 and give a novel interpretation as a Hadamard mirror flow . In Section 4.2, we then establish a O(t−1) convergence result (Theorem 4.4). Throughout this section, M denotes a Hadamard manifold, and f and Q are functions satisfying the hypotheses of Lemma 3.12. 

4.1 Definition and Euclidean interpretation 

We first recall Hirai’s Q-gradient flow in our setting: it is the descent flow associated with the negative of the Q-gradient [Hir25]. Below we show that in the Euclidean setting this flow has a mirror flow interpretation; accordingly we also call it the Hadamard mirror flow .

Definition 4.1 (Hadamard mirror flow) . Let f , Q be functions satisfying the hypotheses of Lemma 3.12. Then the Hadamard mirror flow , or Q-gradient flow, for problem (3.2) is defined as the unique maximal forward solution x t to the first-order differential equation 

˙xt = −∇ Q f (xt) (0 ≤ t < Tmax ) (4.1) 

for a given initial point x 0 ∈ M , where T max ∈ (0, ∞].

By our assumption, the Q-gradient is a locally Lipschitz vector field (Lemma 3.12). Then the existence of a unique maximal solution with Tmax > 0 follows from standard ODE theory. Now Hirai’s descent lemma for the Q-gradient flow follows immediately from Lemma 3.11: 

Lemma 4.2 (cf. [Hir25, Lem. 3.9]) . The function t 7 → Q(d f (xt)) is nonincreasing. Proof. It follows at once from Lemma 3.11, the definition of the Hadamard mirror flow, and the geodesic convexity of f that ddt Q(d f (xt)) = ( ∇2 f )[ ˙xt, ∇Q f (xt)] = −(∇2 f )[ ˙xt, ˙ xt] ≤ 0. In the Euclidean case, the flow (4.1) can be interpreted as a continuous-time dynamical system that served as the original motivation for mirror descent [NY83, §3.1.4]. 24 We briefly describe this connection using our notation. Nemirovski and Yudin consider the problem of minimizing a convex function Q on a reflexive Banach space E. To this end, they choose a function f : E∗ → R

and consider the differential equation for xt ∈ E∗ given by ˙xt = −dQ(d f (xt)) ,where we consider d f (xt) ∈ T∗ 

> xt

(E∗) ∼= E∗∗ ∼= E. If E = ( Rn)∗, then M := E∗ ∼= Rn; using Eq. (3.4) we see that the above is nothing but the mirror flow (4.1) specialized to the Euclidean setting. Their key observation is that f ξ := f − ξ (for ξ ∈ E ∼= E∗∗ ) can serve as a “Lyapunov function”: ddt f ξ (xt) = ( d f (xt) − ξ)[ ˙xt] = dQ(d f (xt))[ ξ − d f (xt)] ≤ Q(ξ) − Q(d f (xt)) , (4.2) using the convexity of Q. Thus, f ξ (xt) is decreasing as long as Q(d f (xt)) > Q(ξ). Assuming the flow is defined at all times and f ξ is bounded below, it follows that lim inf t→∞ Q(d f (xt)) ≤ Q(ξ).In particular, if ξ is a minimizer, then lim inf t→∞ Q(d f (xt)) is the minimum.   

> 24 In Section 5 below, we consider the discrete-time variant of the flow, which can be interpreted as a Hadamard generalization of mirror descent (in dual coordinates). Readers familiar with mirror descent may prefer to skip ahead and consult Section 5.1.

26 4.2 Convergence analysis 

We now analyze the convergence of Q(d f (xt)) under the Hadamard mirror flow. The key idea will be to control the decrease of the objective using the geodesically convex “Lyapunov function” 

f ξ := f + bξ (4.3) and the quantity Q(ξ) defined in Eq. (3.1), where ξ ∈ CM∞ and bξ is a corresponding Busemann function. This generalizes the approach by Nemirovski and Yudin since in the Euclidean setting, the Busemann function bξ simply becomes a linear function bξ = −ξ (up to an arbitrary con-stant); here we use the same notation as in the previous subsection, M = E∗, and we identify the equivalence class ξ of rays in M with a vector ξ ∈ E ∼= E∗∗ .We remark that the function f ξ is related to the asymptotic Legendre–Fenchel conjugate f ∗

introduced in [Hir24, (2.16)] by inf x∈M f ξ (x) = − f ∗(ξ) (up to the choice of aditive constant in bξ ). We first present a lemma that generalizes Eq. (4.2) to the Hadamard setting. 

Lemma 4.3 ( f ξ decreases by the gap of Q). For all ξ ∈ CM∞,

ddt f ξ (xt) ≤ Q(ξ) − Q(d f (xt)) .

Proof. This follows by direct computation: ddt f ξ (xt) = 



d f (xt) + dbξ (xt)



[ ˙xt]= −d(Qxt )( d f (xt)) 

h

d f (xt) + dbξ (xt)

i

≤ Qxt (−dbξ (xt)) − Qxt (d f (xt)) = Q(ξ) − Q(d f (xt)) ,where the second equality follows from the definition of the Hadamard mirror flow (4.1), the inequality from the Euclidean convexity of Qxt , and the last equality follows from the definition of Q(ξ) in Eq. (3.1). We are now ready to prove a convergence result. To this end, we assume that the Hadamard mirror flow xt is defined for all times t ≥ 0; this holds under natural assumptions, see [Hir25, Lem. 3.11]. Then, by combining Lemmas 4.2 and 4.3, we have the following convergence bound: 

Theorem 4.4 (Convergence of Hadamard mirror flow) . Assume that the Hadamard mirror flow (4.1) 

is defined for all t ≥ 0. Then, for all ξ ∈ CM∞ and t > 0,Q(d f (xt)) − Q(ξ) ≤ f ξ (x0) − inf x∈M f ξ (x)

t . (4.4) 

In particular, it holds that 

lim  

> t→∞

Q(d f (xt)) = inf  

> x∈M

Q(d f (x)) (4.5) 

(both sides can be −∞). Proof. The inequality (4.4) is established by the following calculation: 

f ξ (x0) − inf  

> x∈M

f ξ (x) ≥ f ξ (x0) − f ξ (xt) ≥ 

> Zt
> 0

(Q(d f (xs)) − Q(ξ)) ds ≥ t (Q(d f (xt)) − Q(ξ)) ,27 where the second inequality follows from Lemma 4.3, and the last follows from Lemma 4.2. To prove Eq. (4.5), let x ∈ M be arbitrary (and not to be confused with the curve xt) and consider the class ξ ∈ CM∞ of the geodesic ray t 7 → exp x (t∇ f (x)) , where ∇ f (x) := ♭−1d f (x)

and ♭ : TM → T∗M denotes the natural isomorphism induced by the Riemannian metric. By Eq. (2.1), we have d bξ (x) = −d f (x). In other words d f ξ (x) = 0. Hence, by geodesic convexity, we have inf y∈M f ξ (y) = f ξ (x) > −∞. On the other hand, we have Q(ξ) = Q(d f (x)) by Lemma 3.4. Together, and using Eq. (4.4), we find that 

Q(d f (xt)) − Q(d f (x)) = Q(d f (xt)) − Q(ξ) ≤ f ξ (x0) − inf y∈M f ξ (y)

t −→  

> t→∞

0; the numerator is finite by the observation above. Since x ∈ M was arbitrary, this implies that lim inf  

> t→∞

Q(d f (xt)) ≤ inf  

> x∈M

Q(d f (x)) .The limit inferior exists (but may be −∞) because Q(d f (xt)) is nonincreasing by Lemma 4.2. Along with the pointwise lower bound Q(d f (xt)) ≥ inf x∈M Q(d f (x)) , Eq. (4.5) follows. 

# 5 Hadamard mirror descent 

In this section, we study Hadamard mirror descent , the natural discrete-time variant of the Hadamard mirror flow. In Section 5.1 we define the update formally and show that it can be interpreted as a Hadamard generalization of the well-known mirror-descent method (expressed in dual variables), justifying its name. In Section 5.2, we state a step-size condition that implies a O(1/ k) convergence result (Theorem 5.5). This condition is ensured by a natural relative smoothness assumption, which in particular holds when Q is smooth and f is dual-smooth, as we discuss in Section 5.3. These assumptions are motivated by the Euclidean theory and easy to verify in practice. Throughout, M

denotes a Hadamard manifold, and f , Q are functions satisfying the hypotheses of Definition 3.10. 

5.1 Definition and Euclidean interpretation 

We first define the discrete-time variant of Definition 4.1. 

Definition 5.1 (Hadamard mirror descent) . Let f , Q be functions satisfying the hypotheses of Defi-nition 3.10. Then the Hadamard mirror descent , or Q-gradient descent, for problem (3.2) with step size η > 0 is defined as the iteration xk+1 := exp xk



−η∇Q f (xk)



(k ∈ N) (5.1) 

for a given initial point x 0 ∈ M .

We remark that Hirai (without assuming differentiability of Q) defined a Q-sub gradient method and asked for natural conditions under which convergence can be guaranteed [Hir25, (3.16), Quest. 3.21]. For the special case of the Q-gradient method, we give such conditions in Section 5.2. Analogously to the discussion in Section 4.1, in the Euclidean case, the update (5.1) can be understood as a (dual) formulation of mirror descent , justifying our terminology. We recall the standard setting of mirror descent as follows (see, e.g., [Bec17, §9]). Let E be a Euclidean space, and let h : E → R be a strongly convex and essentially smooth function, often called the distance-generating function in this context. The associated Bregman divergence is defined by 

Dh(w∥z) := h(w) − (h(z) + dh(z)[ w − z]) (w ∈ dom h, z ∈ int dom h). (5.2) 28 Then the mirror descent procedure for the objective Q : E → R and step size η reads as follows: 

zk+1 := argmin 

> z∈E



Q(zk) + dQ(zk)[ z − zk] + 1

η Dh(z∥zk)



.The first-order optimality condition for this minimization is d Q(zk) + 1 

> η

(dh(zk+1) − dh(zk)) = 0, that is, d h(zk+1) = dh(zk) − ηdQ(zk). If we instead use the “dual” variables xk := dh(zk) ∈ E∗,we arrive at the following iteration in “gradient space” (or rather differential space): 

xk+1 = xk − ηdQ(d(h∗)( xk)) , (5.3) where h∗ : E∗ → R denotes the Legendre–Fenchel conjugate of h, which satisfies d (h∗) = ( dh)−1 (e.g., [HUL01, Cor. E.1.4.4]). Let E = ( Rn)∗ and set M := E∗ ∼= Rn. Using Eq. (3.4), we see that the iter-ation (5.3) coincides with the Hadamard mirror descent (5.1) specialized to the Euclidean setting. From [BBT17, Thm. 1], [LFN18, Thm. 3.1] it is known that the step size in mirror descent can be chosen as η ≤ 1/ L, where L is the so-called relative smoothness parameter of Q with respect to h:

DQ(w∥z) ≤ L · Dh(w∥z). (5.4) Note that this equation simply states that Lh − Q is convex. In dual coordinates, we have the following expression for the Bregman divergence: 

Dh(d(h∗)( y)∥d(h∗)( x)) = Dh∗ (x∥y).Hence, identifying f = h∗, we can write Eq. (5.4) as 

DQ(d f (y)∥d f (x)) ≤ L · Df (x∥y). (5.5) In Section 5.3, we will see that this reformulation generalizes appropriately to the Hadamard set-ting and implies convergence for Hadamard mirror descent. 

5.2 Convergence analysis 

In this section, we present a general analysis of the convergence of Hadamard mirror descent under the following hypothesis. 

Definition 5.2 (Step-size condition) . We say that the sequence (5.1) satisfies the step-size condition if 

η (Q(d f (xk+1)) − Q(d f (xk))) ≤ f (xk) − f (xk+1) + d f (xk)

h

exp −1 

> xk

xk+1

i

(∀k ∈ N). (5.6) In Section 5.3 we will discuss a natural and easy-to-verify condition that implies Eq. (5.6). The step-size condition allows us to proceed analogously to Section 4.2. First, we note that the condition immediately implies the following analog of Lemma 4.2. 

Lemma 5.3 (Q is nonincreasing) . Under the step-size condition (5.6) , for all k ∈ N,Q(d f (xk+1)) ≤ Q(d f (xk)) .

Proof. This follows from the step-size condition (5.6), whose right-hand side is nonpositive by the geodesic convexity of f (along the geodesic through xk and xk+1). Next, we prove the analog of Lemma 4.3. 29 Lemma 5.4 ( f ξ decreases by the gap of Q). Under the step-size condition (5.6) , for all ξ ∈ CM∞

and k ∈ N, 1

η



f ξ (xk+1) − f ξ (xk)



≤ Q(ξ) − Q(d f (xk+1)) ,

where we recall that f ξ := f + bξ as defined in Eq. (4.3) .Proof. We compute: 1

η



f ξ (xk+1) − f ξ (xk)



= 1

η



f (xk+1) − f (xk) + bξ (xk+1) − bξ (xk)



≤ Q(d f (xk)) − Q(d f (xk+1)) + 1

η d f (xk)

h

exp −1 

> xk

xk+1

i

− 1

η dbξ (xk+1)

h

exp −1 

> xk+1

xk

i

= Q(d f (xk)) − Q(d f (xk+1)) + 1

η d f (xk)

h

exp −1 

> xk

xk+1

i

+ 1

η dbξ (xk+1)

h

τxk →xk+1 exp −1 

> xk

xk+1

i

= Q(d f (xk)) − Q(d f (xk+1)) − d(Qxk )( d f (xk)) 

h

d f (xk) + τ∗  

> xk→xk+1

dbξ (xk+1)

i

= Qxk (d f (xk)) + d(Qxk )( d f (xk)) 

h

−τ∗  

> xk→xk+1

dbξ (xk+1) − d f (xk)

i

− Q(d f (xk+1)) 

≤ Qxk



−τ∗  

> xk→xk+1

dbξ (xk+1)



− Q(d f (xk+1)) = Q(ξ) − Q(d f (xk+1)) ,where the first equality holds by substituting the definition of f ξ ; the subsequent inequality fol-lows from the step-size condition (5.6) and the geodesic convexity of bξ ; the second equality holds because exp −1 

> w

(z) = −τz→w(exp −1 

> z

(w)) for all z, w ∈ M ; the third equality follows from the defini-tion of Hadamard mirror descent (5.1), i.e., exp −1 

> xk

xk+1 = −η∇Q f (xk), and of the Q-gradient (3.3); next we rearrange and use the notation for the restrictions Qxk := Q|T∗ 

> xkM

; the last inequality holds by the Euclidean convexity of Qxk ; and the last equality uses the parallel transport invariance of Q

and the definition of Q(ξ) (see Eq. (3.1)). We thus obtain the following convergence theorem analogously to Theorem 4.4. 

Theorem 5.5 (Convergence of Hadamard mirror descent under the step-size condition) . Under the step-size condition (5.6) , for all ξ ∈ CM∞ and k ≥ 1,Q(d f (xk)) − Q(ξ) ≤ f ξ (x0) − inf x∈M f ξ (x)

ηk . (5.7) 

In particular, it holds that 

lim  

> k→∞

Q(d f (xk)) = inf  

> x∈M

Q(d f (x)) (5.8) 

(both sides can be −∞). Proof. The inequality (5.7) is proved by the following calculation: 

f ξ (x0) − inf  

> x∈M

f ξ (x) ≥ f ξ (x0) − f ξ (xk) ≥ η

> k

# ∑

> i=1

(Q(d f (xi)) − Q(ξ)) ≥ ηk (Q(d f (xk)) − Q(ξ)) ,where the second inequality follows from Lemma 5.4 and a telescoping sum, and the last follows from Lemma 5.3. Then Eq. (5.8) is shown in the same manner as in Theorem 4.4. 30 Remark 5.6. To obtain Theorem 5.5, the hypothesis d f (x) ∈ int dom Qx in Definition 3.10 is not required for every x ∈ M , but only for the iterates x = xk of the Hadamard mirror descent, so that the iteration (5.1) 

is well-defined. This fact will be used in Section 6.5. 

5.3 Relative smoothness and dual smoothness 

In this section, we identify a natural relative smoothness parameter that implies the step-size con-dition (5.6) when it is finite. The definition is a generalization of the eponymous parameter in the Euclidean setting. We also show that relative smoothness is implied by smoothness of the objec-tive Q and dual-smoothness of the function f ; we define the latter notion below. We first define a Riemannian generalization of the Bregman divergence and then define relative smoothness. 

Definition 5.7 (Riemannian Bregman divergence) . Let f : M → R be a geodesically convex differen-tiable function. Then its Riemannian Bregman divergence is defined as DM 

> f

(x∥y) := f (x) −



f (y) + d f (y)

h

exp −1 

> y

x

i 

≥ 0 (x, y ∈ M ). (5.9) When M is a Euclidean space, we recover the usual formulation of the Bregman divergence; in this case we omit the superscript, as in (5.2). 

Definition 5.8 (Relative smoothness) . Let f and Q satisfy the hypotheses of Definition 3.10. Then the pair ( f , Q) is said to be L -relatively smooth if for all x , y ∈ M ,DQx (τ∗

> x→y

d f (y)∥d f (x)) ≤ L · DM 

> f

(x∥y), (5.10) 

where the left-hand side uses the Euclidean Bregman divergence (defined as in (5.2) ) and the right-hand side the Riemannian Bregman divergence (5.9) . The number L > 0 is called the relative smoothness parameter. 

For Euclidean space M = Rn, the relative smoothness condition (5.10) reduces to (5.5), which in turn is equivalent to the standard definition (5.4) of relative smoothness of Q with respect to the Legendre-Fenchel conjugate h = f ∗ of f (under the assumptions discussed therein). The next result states that, in the general Hadamard setting, relative smoothness implies the step-size condition when applied to the Hadamard mirror descent sequence for any step size η ≤

1/ L. In particular, our convergence result applies. 

Proposition 5.9 (Relative smoothness implies step-size condition) .

(a) The step-size condition (5.6) is equivalent to (5.10) with x = xk, y = xk+1, and L = 1/ η > 0.(b) If the pair ( f , Q) is L-relatively smooth, the step-size condition (5.6) holds for all η ≤ 1/ L and hence Theorem 5.5 applies. Proof. (a) We first compute the two Bregman divergences in (5.10) for x = xk and y = xk+1:

DM 

> f

(xk∥xk+1) = f (xk) − f (xk+1) − d f (xk+1)

h

exp −1 

> xk+1

xk

i

= f (xk) − f (xk+1) + 



τ∗  

> xk→xk+1

d f (xk+1)

h 

exp −1 

> xk

xk+1

i

,because exp −1 

> w

(z) = −τz→w(exp −1 

> z

(w)) for all z, w ∈ M , while 

DQxk (τ∗  

> xk→xk+1

d f (xk+1)∥d f (xk)) 

31 = Qxk (τ∗  

> xk→xk+1

d f (xk+1)) −



Qxk (d f (xk)) + d(Qxk )( d f (xk)) 

h

τ∗  

> xk→xk+1

d f (xk+1) − d f (xk)

i 

= Q(d f (xk+1)) − Q(d f (xk)) + 1

η



τ∗  

> xk→xk+1

d f (xk+1) − d f (xk)

 h 

exp −1 

> xk

xk+1

i

,where the second equality uses the parallel transport invariance of Q as well as the definition of the Hadamard mirror descent (5.1) and the Q-gradient (3.3): we have exp −1 

> xk

xk+1 = −η∇Q f (xk) = 

−ηd(Qxk )( d f (xk)) . If we substitute the above into (5.10) and use L = 1 

> η

, the term proportional to (τ∗  

> xk→xk+1

d f (xk+1))[ exp −1 

> xk

(xk+1)] cancels out and we obtain the step-size condition (5.6). (b) This follows from part (a) and the observation that L-relative smoothness implies L′-relative smoothness for any L′ ≥ L.In the Euclidean case, it is well-known that if f is L f -smooth (equivalently, the distance-generating function h = f ∗ is L−1 

> f

-strongly convex) and separately Q is LQ-smooth, then the pair ( f , Q) is relatively smooth with parameter L f LQ. This provides an easy-to-check criterion. In the Hadamard setting, we replace the smoothness of f by the following condition. 

Definition 5.10 (Dual smoothness) . A geodesically convex differentiable function f : M → R is called L f -dual-smooth if for all x , y ∈ M ,

12 ∥τ∗

> x→y

d f (y) − d f (x)∥2 ≤ L f · DM 

> f

(x∥y), (5.11) 

where ∥·∥ denotes the norm of cotangent vectors induced by the Riemannian metric. The quantity L f > 0

is called the dual smoothness parameter of f . 

This definition should be contrasted with L f -smoothness : it can be defined as DM 

> f

(y∥x) ≤ L f 

> 2

d(x, y)2,or equivalently 

∥τ∗

> x→y

d f (y) − d f (x)∥ ≤ L f · d(x, y) (x, y ∈ M ), (5.12) or simply as Euclidean L f -smoothness along any unit-speed geodesic γ : R → M . For twice differentiable f , the latter means that d2

dt2 f (γ(t)) ≤ L f . (5.13) In the Euclidean case ( M = Rn), smoothness and dual-smoothness coincide: a function is L f -smooth if and only if it is L f -dual-smooth [Bec17, Thm. 5.8]. In the Hadamard setting, these pa-rameters are in general distinct: while any L f -dual-smooth function is L f -smooth, 25 the converse is not true in general (with the same parameter); we give an explicit counterexample in Exam-ple 6.23. In particular, unlike L-smoothness, L-dual-smoothness of a function does not in general follow from L-dual-smoothness of its restrictions to geodesics (since the latter is equivalent to 

L-smoothness). Using this notion, we can establish a Hadamard generalization of the Euclidean criterion. It will be applied to the problem of convex optimization on moment polytopes (Sections 6 and 7).                                               

> 25 To see this, suppose that fis Lf-dual-smooth, and apply Eq. (5.11) twice, once with the roles of xand yre-versed: we obtain ∥τ∗
> x→ydf(y)−df(x)∥2≤Lf·(DM
> f(x∥y) + DM
> f(y∥x)) = Lf·(τ∗
> x→ydf(y)−df(x))[ exp −1
> xy]≤
> Lf· ∥ τ∗
> x→ydf(y)−df(x)∥ · d(x,y). Thus we have established Eq. (5.12).

32 Proposition 5.11. If f is L f -dual-smooth and Q is L Q-smooth, then ( f , Q) is L f LQ-relatively smooth. In particular, for any η ≤ 1/ (L f LQ), Theorem 5.5 applies. Proof. This is now immediate: 

DQx (τ∗

> x→y

d f (y)∥d f (x)) ≤ LQ

2 ∥τ∗

> x→y

d f (y) − d f (x)∥2 ≤ L f LQ · DM 

> f

(x∥y),where the first inequality follows from the LQ-smoothness of the Euclidean convex function Qx,and the second inequality follows from the L f -dual-smoothness of f .

# 6 Convex optimization on moment polytopes 

In this section, we explore a central application of Hadamard mirror descent—convex optimiza-tion on moment polytopes. In Section 6.1, we recall the definition of moment polytopes and their characterization in terms of Kempf–Ness functions. In Section 6.2, after recalling Hirai’s approach via holonomy-invariant convex objectives, we give general O(k−1) convergence results for convex optimization on moment polytopes using Hadamard mirror descent; we also state analogous re-sults for the mirror flow. In Section 6.3, we show that Kempf–Ness functions are dual-smooth, with a parameter that is naturally computed from the group action. We also comment on the relation to smoothness, sharpening bounds from the literature. The remaining subsections are devoted to specific actions. In Section 6.4, we consider the tensor action and the associated entanglement polytopes , which underlie many applications. In Section 6.5, we discuss the tensor power action and explain how this case can be reduced to the tensor action. In Section 6.6, we consider arbitrary homogeneous polynomial actions of GL (n). In all these settings, the convergence of Hadamard mirror descent is polynomial in the input bit-length. 

6.1 Moment polytopes and Kempf–Ness functions 

Let G ⊆ GL (n) be a connected self-adjoint Zariski-closed subgroup, as in Sections 2.3 and 3.2. Let P := G ∩ PD (n) denote the associated Hadamard symmetric space, K := G ∩ U(n) the maximal compact subgroup, H := i Lie K = Lie G ∩ Herm (n) the Hermitian part of the Lie algebra (which is naturally identified with the tangent space at the identity H ∼= TI P), and let C ⊆ H denote a Weyl chamber; recall the map s : H → C such that {uXu † : u ∈ K} ∩ C = {s(X)} for all X ∈ H.Let π : G → GL (V ) be a rational representation of G on a finite-dimensional complex vector space V. We may equip V with a K-invariant inner product ⟨· , ·⟩ , so π(K) ⊆ U(V ); we denote the associated norm by ∥·∥ := p⟨· , ·⟩ . We write g · v := π(g)v for g ∈ G and v ∈ V , so G · v

denotes the orbit of v. Let Π : Lie G → L(V ) denote the corresponding Lie algebra representation: 

Π(X) := ∂t=0π(etX ) for X ∈ Lie G. We observe that π(g†) = π(g)† for g ∈ G and Π(H) ⊆

Herm (V ) because π(K) ⊆ U(V ). We can then define the moment map and the moment polytope. 

Definition 6.1 (Moment map) . For a group and representation as above, the moment map is defined as 

μ : V \ { 0} → H, tr [μ(v)X] = ⟨v, Π(X)v⟩⟨v, v⟩ ∀X ∈ H. (6.1) 

We remark that there are several equivalent variants of this definition in the literature. For example, the domain can also be taken as the projective space P(V ), since the moment map depends on its argument v only through the corresponding ray [v]. It is also natural to use the dual space H∗ as the codomain. 

33 The moment map is K-equivariant in the following way: for all v ∈ V \ { 0} and u ∈ K, we have 

μ(u · v) = uμ(v)u†. (6.2) This holds because K acts unitarily and we have Π(u† Xu ) = π(u)†Π(X)π(u) for all X ∈ H.In general, the image of the moment map need not be convex (if the group is non-commutative). However, one obtains a polytope by intersecting the image with the Weyl chamber C; equivalently, we may apply the map s : H → C. More precisely, one can obtain a convex polytope for any G-invariant irreducible projective subvariety. For our purposes it suffices to consider orbit closures. 

Definition 6.2 (Moment polytope) . For a group and representation as above, we define the moment polytope ∆(v) of a vector v ∈ V \ { 0},

∆(v) :=

n

μ(w) | [w] ∈ G · [v]

o

∩ C =

n

s(μ(w)) | [w] ∈ G · [v]

o

= {s(μ(g · v)) | g ∈ G} = {s(μ(x · v)) | x ∈ P} ⊆ C.(6.3) 

This is also called the moment polytope of the orbit closure in projective space. As above, we write [w] ∈

P(V ) for the point in projective space corresponding to a nonzero vector w ∈ V . The first two char-acterizations are equivalent by equivariance (6.2) , the third follows from the second by continuity and the compactness of orbit closures in projective space, and the last follows using the polar decomposition, equivariance (6.2) , and the K-invariance of s: it holds that s (μ(g · v)) = s(uμ(x · v)u†) = s(μ(x · v)) 

where g = ux is the polar decomposition (u ∈ K, x ∈ P). 

Remarkably, ∆(v) is indeed a convex polytope: 

Theorem 6.3 ([NM84, Kir84]) . For any v ∈ V \ { 0}, ∆(v) is a rational convex polytope. 

The moment map can be interpreted as the gradient of a geodesically convex function, called the Kempf–Ness function. This is an important insight that is well-known in the literature [Kem78, NM84, Kir84]. 

Definition 6.4 (Kempf–Ness function) . The Kempf–Ness function of a vector v ∈ V \ { 0} is defined as fv : P → R, fv(x) := log ⟨v, x · v⟩. (6.4) The following properties are well-known (see, e.g., [BFG +19, HS24]). 

Lemma 6.5 (Gradient vs. moment map) . Let v ∈ V \ { 0}. Then: (a) The Kempf–Ness function f v is geodesically convex. (b) The differential of f v is directly related to the moment map: for every x ∈ P, τ∗

> I→x

d fv(x) is identified with μ(x1/2 · v) by the Hilbert–Schmidt inner product on T I P ∼= H (the Riemannian metric at I ∈ P). In other words, for every X ∈ H we have 

d fv(x)[ τI→x X] = τ∗

> I→x

d fv(x)[ X] = tr [μ(x1/2 · v)X] = ⟨w, Π(X)w⟩⟨w, w⟩ ,

where w := x1/2 · v. 

34 6.2 Convex optimization on moment polytopes 

We now turn to convex optimization on the moment polytope ∆(v) of a vector v ∈ V \ { 0}.Let ϕ : A → R be a function that satisfies ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3). We assume that s(μ(g · v)) ∈ int dom ϕ for all g ∈ G. We consider the minimization of ϕ on the moment polytope: minimize ϕ(p) over p ∈ ∆(v). (6.5) Note that there always exists a minimizer since ϕ is l.s.c. and ∆(v) is compact. We may extend ϕ to an objective Φ := ϕ ◦ s : H → R. Then Φ satisfies ( Φ1)–( Φ3) by Propo-sition 3.6, as well as μ(g · v) ∈ int dom Φ for all g ∈ G. This extension is natural: Φ is a convex function on the entire moment map image, yet its K-invariance implies that it only depends on the moment polytope. Importantly, as pointed out by Hirai, the minimization problem (6.5) can be reduced to a problem of the general form (3.2) [Hir25]. 26 Let Q : T∗ P → R denote the holonomy-invariant convex objective corresponding to ϕ and Φ. Then we have, for any x ∈ P,

Q(d fv(x)) = QI (τ∗

> I→x

d fv(x)) = Φ(μ(x1/2 · v)) = ϕ(s(μ(x1/2 · v))) , (6.6) where the first equality holds by the invariance of Q under parallel transport, the second equality follows from Lemma 6.5 and the fact that QI is identified with Φ using the Riemannian metric at I ∈ P, and the last equality follows from the definition of Φ in terms of ϕ. By taking the infimum over x ∈ P and using the last expression in Eq. (6.3), we obtain the following fundamental relation: 

Proposition 6.6. Let ϕ : A → R be a function that satisfies ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3), with associated holonomy-invariant convex objective Q : T∗ P → R. Let v ∈ V \ { 0} be such that s (μ(g · v)) ∈ int dom ϕ for all g ∈ G. Then: 

inf  

> x∈P

Q(d fv(x)) = min  

> p∈∆(v)

ϕ(p).

Proof. The inequality inf x∈P Q(d fv(x)) ≥ min p∈∆(v) ϕ(p) is direct from {s(μ(x · v)) | x ∈ P} ⊆ 

∆(v) and Eq. (6.6). For the opposite inequality, we use the fact that ∆(v) is a polytope and the assumption that {s(μ(x · v)) | x ∈ P} ⊆ int dom ϕ; see [Roc70, Cor. 7.3.2 and Thm. 10.1]. As a consequence, Hadamard mirror flow and descent can be applied to this setting. First, we compute the Q-gradient of fv at x ∈ P concretely in terms of the objective Φ:

∇Q fv(x) = dQx(d fv(x)) = τI→xdQI (τ∗

> I→x

d fv(x)) = τI→x ∇Φ(μ(x1/2 · v)) = x1/2 ∇Φ(μ(x1/2 · v)) x1/2 , (6.7) where the first equality is the definition of the Q-gradient (3.3), the second follows from the in-variance of Q under parallel transport; for the third we use Lemma 6.5 (b) and identify QI with Φ

using the Hilbert–Schmidt inner product on H ∼= TI P; and the last follows from the concrete for-mula for the parallel transport on P (Sections 2.2 and 2.3). Using this and the concrete formula for the exponential map on P (Sections 2.2 and 2.3), we obtain the following concrete formula for the iteration of the Hadamard mirror descent (5.1): 

xk+1 := exp xk



−η∇Q fv(xk)



= xk1/2 e−η∇Φ(μ(x1/2   

> k·v))

xk1/2 . (6.8) We emphasize that ∇Φ denotes the usual Euclidean gradient. The update xk 7 → xk+1 in (6.8) is easily translated into corresponding updates of group ele-ments gk 7 → gk+1 in G, and of vectors vk 7 → vk+1 in the representation space V:   

> 26 Hirai stated this reduction in the case where Gis a product of GL (n)’s, but his discussion readily generalizes to any connected self-adjoint subgroup G.

35 Lemma 6.7. Let 0̸ = v ∈ V . Let ϕ : A → R be a function that satisfies ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3) and s (μ(g · v)) ∈

int dom ϕ for all g ∈ G. Let (xk)k∈N be the Hadamard mirror descent sequence (6.8) starting from x 0 := I. (a) Define a sequence (gk)k∈N in G by gk+1 := e− η   

> 2∇Φ(μ(gk·v))

gk, g0 := I. (6.9) 

Then, it holds that g † 

> k

gk = xk for all k ∈ N. That is, g k = uk x1/2  

> k

for some u k ∈ K. As a consequence, we have ∇Φ(μ(gk · v)) = uk∇Φ(μ(x1/2  

> k

· v)) u† 

> k

for all k ∈ N.(b) For any choice of nonzero scalars c k ∈ C×, define a sequence (vk)k∈N in V by vk+1 := ck+1π



e− η  

> 2∇Φ(μ(vk))



vk, v0 := c0v. (6.10) 

Then, [vk] = [ gk · v] ∈ P(V ) for all k ∈ N. Moreover, ϕ(s(μ(vk))) = Φ(μ(vk)) = Q(d fv(xk)) .Proof. (a) We show this by induction. The base case k = 0 holds trivially. Thus, assume that g† 

> k

gk =

xk. By the polar decomposition, this is equivalent to gk = uk x1/2  

> k

for some uk ∈ K, hence 

∇Φ(μ(gk · v)) = ∇Φ(ukμ(x1/2  

> k

· v)u† 

> k

) = uk∇Φ(μ(x1/2  

> k

· v)) u† 

> k

, (6.11) where the first equality holds by the K-equivariance property (6.2) of the moment map, and the second one follows from the K-invariance of Φ, which implies that ∇Φ is K-equivariant. Thus, 

gk+1 = e− η   

> 2∇Φ(μ(gk·v))

gk = e− η    

> 2uk∇Φ(μ(x1/2
> k·v)) u†
> k

uk x1/2  

> k

= uke− η   

> 2∇Φ(μ(x1/2
> k·v))

x1/2  

> k

,which shows that g† 

> k+1

gk+1 = xk+1.(b) We again proceed by induction. The base case is clear, so assume that [vk] = [ gk · v]. Then 

[vk+1] = [ e− η   

> 2∇Φ(μ(vk))

· vk] = [ e− η   

> 2∇Φ(μ(gk·v))

gk · v] = [ gk+1 · v],where the second equality uses the induction hypothesis and the fact that the moment map is insensitive to rescaling its argument. This establishes that [vk] = [ gk · v] for all k ∈ N. To confirm the second claim, note that 

Q(d fv(xk)) = Φ



μ(x1/2  

> k

· v)



= Φ



u† 

> k

μ(gk · v) uk



= Φ(μ(vk)) = ϕ(s(μ(vk))) , (6.12) where we first used Eq. (6.6), then that gk = uk x1/2  

> k

by part (a), along with the equivariance property (6.2) of the moment map, then the rescaling invariance of the moment map and the 

K-invariance of Φ, and finally the definition Φ = ϕ ◦ s.We remark that the update formula in Eq. (6.10) can also be written in terms of the gradient of ϕ:

vk+1 := ck+1π



u†e− η 

> 2∇ϕ(p)

u



vk (6.13) for any u ∈ K such that uμ(vk)u† =: p ∈ A. This formula is obtained from Eq. (6.10) using the relation between the gradients of Φ and ϕ in Proposition 3.6 (b). It is used in Sections 6.4 and 6.5. 36 Remark 6.8. While all three update formulas (6.8) , (6.9) and (6.10) are equivalent by the lemma above, they have different advantages and disadvantages in practice due to numerical errors. If one stores the matrices x k or g k as in Eq. (6.8) or Eq. (6.9) , these can become increasingly ill-conditioned and may in fact diverge, making the matrix function computation harder. One can avoid dealing with ill-conditioned matrices by storing vectors v k instead, as in Eq. (6.10) , which can even be normalized using the freedom in the scalars c k. However, in this case, numerical errors during the update might move [vk] outside its orbit G · [v], resulting in minimization over a different moment polytope. Developing a numerically stable method remains an open problem. 

Properties similar to those in Lemma 6.7 hold for the Hadamard mirror flow (4.1). By Eq. (6.7), the Hadamard mirror flow can be written as the following first-order differential equation: ˙xt = −x1/2  

> t

∇Φ(μ(x1/2  

> t

· v)) x1/2  

> t

. (6.14) Since Kempf–Ness functions are C∞, we only need to require sufficient regularity on Φ.

Lemma 6.9. Let 0̸ = v ∈ V . Let ϕ : A → R be a function that satisfies ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3) and s (μ(g ·

v)) ∈ int dom ϕ for all g ∈ G. Suppose that Φ is twice continuously differentiable on int dom Φ.Let (xt)t∈[0, Tmax ) denote the unique maximal solution to the Hadamard mirror flow (6.14) with x 0 := I. (a) The maximal solution (gt) to the first-order differential equation 

˙gt = − 12 ∇Φ(μ(gt · v)) gt, g0 := I (6.15) 

is defined on the same interval [0, Tmax ), and it holds that g † 

> t

gt = xt.(b) The maximal solution (vt) to the first-order differential equation 

˙vt = − 12 Π(∇Φ(μ(vt))) vt, v0 := v (6.16) 

is defined for all times t ∈ [0, Tmax ), and it holds that v t = gt · v, as well as ϕ(s(μ(vt))) = 

Φ(μ(vt)) = Q(d fv(xt)) .Proof. (a) Let (gt)t∈[0, T′ 

> max )

denote the unique maximal solution to (6.15). We will show that Tmax =

T′ 

> max

and g† 

> t

gt = xt for all t ∈ [0, Tmax ). To this end, let yt := g† 

> t

gt. Then (yt) is a solution to (6.14) starting from y0 = I on the time interval [0, T′

> max

):˙yt = g† 

> t

˙gt + ( ˙gt)† gt = −g† 

> t

∇Φ(μ(gt · v)) gt = −y1/2  

> t

∇Φ(μ(y1/2  

> t

· v)) y1/2  

> t

;in the second equality we use that ∇Φ(μ(gt · v)) ∈ H is Hermitian, and the last step holds by the same reasoning as in Eq. (6.11). By ODE uniqueness, it follows that yt = g† 

> t

gt must agree with the maximal solution xt on [0, T′

> max

) and Tmax ≥ T′

> max

. It remains to prove that Tmax =

T′

> max

. Indeed, suppose that Tmax > T′

> max

. Then the solution {gt}t∈[0, T′ 

> max )

belongs to a compact subset of G, since g† 

> t

gt = xt, hence gt ∈ K · x1/2  

> t

, and {xt}t∈[0, T′ 

> max ]

is compact. By ODE continuation, this means that gt can be extended past T′

> max

, which is a contradiction. (b) Let (gt) denote the maximal solution from part (a). Then vt := gt · v = π(gt)v is a solution to (6.16) starting from v0 = v:˙vt = ddt π(gt)v = dπ(gt)[ ˙gt]v = Π( ˙gt g−1 

> t

)π(gt)v = − 12 Π(∇Φ(μ(vt))) vt,where the third equality follows from the definition of the Lie algebra representation. By ODE uniqueness, vt must agree with the maximal solution to (6.16) on [0, Tmax ). The second claim is proved just like Eq. (6.12). 37 We next derive a concrete formula for the step-size condition in terms of Φ and the sequence 

{vk}k∈N defined in Eq. (6.10). 

Lemma 6.10. Let v ∈ V \ { 0} be such that s (μ(g · v)) ∈ int dom ϕ for all g ∈ G. Then, the step-size condition (5.6) for the Hadamard mirror descent sequence (xk)k∈N generated by (6.8) starting from x 0 := Iis equivalent to the following condition: 

Φ(μ(vk)) − Φ(μ(vk+1)) − tr [μ(vk)∇Φ(μ(vk))] ≥ 1

η log ∥vk+1∥2

|ck+1|2∥vk∥2 , (6.17) 

where (vk)k∈N is any sequence of vectors defined as in Eq. (6.10) with the associated scalars (ck)k∈N.Proof. First, we have d fv(xk)

h

exp −1 

> xk

xk+1

i

= d fv(xk)

h

−η∇Q fv(xk)

i

= −η d fv(xk)

h

τI→xk ∇Φ(μ(x1/2  

> k

· v)) 

i

= −η tr 

h

μ(x1/2  

> k

· v)∇Φ(μ(x1/2  

> k

· v)) 

i

= −η tr [μ(vk)∇Φ(μ(vk))] ,where the first equality uses the definition of Hadamard mirror descent; the second equality rewrites this using the penultimate expression for ∇Q fv(xk) from Eq. (6.7); the third equality fol-lows from Lemma 6.5 (b); for the last equality, we use Lemma 6.7 (a) and (b), along with the 

K-equivariance property (6.2) of the moment map. By Lemma 6.7 (b), we also know that Q(d fv(xk)) = Φ(μ(vk)) for all k. Finally, we observe that 

fv(xk+1) − fv(xk) = log ⟨v, g† 

> k+1

gk+1 · v⟩⟨v, g† 

> k

gk · v⟩ = log ∥gk+1 · v∥2

∥gk · v∥2 = log ∥e− η   

> 2∇Φ(μ(gk·v))

· (gk · v)∥2

∥gk · v∥2

= log ∥e− η   

> 2∇Φ(μ(vk))

· vk∥2

∥vk∥2 = log ∥vk+1∥2

|ck+1|2∥vk∥2 ,using Lemma 6.7: the first equality follows from xk = g† 

> k

gk, the second equality follows from 

π(g†) = π(g)† for all g ∈ G, the third equality follows from Eq. (6.9), the fourth equality follows from [vk] = [ gk · v], and the last equality follows from Eq. (6.10). If we substitute the above into the step-size condition (5.6), we obtain Eq. (6.17). We now instantiate our convergence results (Theorems 4.4 and 5.5) in this setting. In par-ticular, we discuss the quantity inf x∈P f ξ 

> v

(x), which must be finite to obtain the desired O(k−1)

and O(t−1) convergence rates. First, we fix some conventions. Recall that the Busemann func-tion bξ is only defined up to an additive constant. We will make the following choice: using the natural identification CP ∞ ∼= TI P ∼= H, we can associate to any equivalence class ξ ∈ CP ∞ the unique tangent vector X ∈ H such that ξ is represented by the geodesic ray t 7 → etX . We write bX

for the Busemann function corresponding to this geodesic ray. Explicitly: 

bX : P → R, bX (x) := lim 

> t→∞



∥X∥F∥log (x−1/2 eXt x−1/2 )∥F − ∥ X∥2Ft



.In particular, this fixes the additive constant to be bX (I) = 0. We analogously write f Xv := fv + bX.Then we have, for all X ∈ H,12 f Xv (I) = 12 fv(I) = 12 log ∥v∥2 = log ∥v∥.The infimum is the logarithm of the so-called “capacity”. We follow the conventions of [FW20]. 38 Definition 6.11 (Capacity) . Let X ∈ H. We define the logarithmic X-capacity of v ∈ V \ { 0} as 

log cap X (v) := 12 inf  

> x∈P

f Xv (x) ∈ [−∞, ∞).This quantity has been introduced in [BFG +19] as a generalization of the notions of matrix, opera-tor, polynomial and tensor capacity [GY98, Gur04, Gur06, BFG +18] for X ∈ C in a Weyl chamber. It was subsequently generalized to all of H in [FW20, BCV21] (cf. the rate function in the latter work). 27 The shifted Kempf–Ness function satisfies the equivariance f Xu·v(x) = f u† Xu v (u† xu ), so log cap X (u · v) = log cap u† Xu (v) (u ∈ K, X ∈ H). (6.18) Now consider the choice X := μ(v) ∈ H. Then, the moment map μ(v) ∈ H equals d fv(I)

(Lemma 6.5 (b)), which in turn means that the geodesically convex f μ(v) 

> v

has a minimum at I, hence log cap μ(v)(v) = log ∥v∥.If we take u ∈ K such that p := s(μ(v)) = uμ(v)u† = μ(u · v), we have log cap p(u · v) = log ∥u ·

v∥ = log ∥v∥ by the K-invariance of the norm. By applying this discussion to any x · v (x ∈ P)in place of v, one finds that for any p ∈ { s(μ(x · v)) | x ∈ P}, there exists g ∈ G such that log cap p(g · v) > −∞. In fact, it is known that this last condition not only characterizes a dense set of the moment polytope, but is equivalent to the condition that p belongs to the moment polytope: 

Proposition 6.12 ([NM84, Bri87, BFG +19, FW20]) . For any p ∈ C, it holds that p ∈ ∆(v) ⇐⇒ ∃ g ∈ G, log cap p(g · v) > −∞ ⇐⇒ ∃ u ∈ K, log cap p(u · v) > −∞.This equivalence is known as the shifting trick and it was originally stated for rational points in the Weyl chamber, where it has a representation-theoretic interpretation; the generalization to arbitrary points and the second characterization are stated, e.g., in [FW20]. It is also known that if there exists g ∈ G as above, then this is the case for generic g ∈ G. We give an elegant proof of the second equivalence in Lemma B.2 that directly applies to arbitrary points p ∈ C (even X ∈ H). The shifting trick was used in [BFG +19] to give algorithms for deciding membership of points in the moment polytope by minimization of the shifted Kempf–Ness function f pg·v for a random choice of g ∈ G. Here, we make use of it for the convergence analysis of Hadamard mirror flow and descent. Following [FW20], and motivated by Proposition 6.12, we also define the following quantity. 

Definition 6.13 (K-invariant capacity) . Let p ∈ C. Then we define the K -invariant logarithmic p-capacity of v ∈ V \ { 0} as 

log Cap p(v) := sup 

> u∈K

log cap p(u · v) = sup 

> u∈K

log cap u† pu (v) = sup  

> X∈H,s(X)= p

log cap X (v).This quantity is indeed K-invariant by definition: we have log Cap p(u · v) = log Cap p(v) for u ∈ K.Now it follows from Proposition 6.12 that, for every p ∈ C,

p ∈ ∆(v) ⇐⇒ log Cap p(v) > −∞. (6.19) 

> 27 We caution that the various definitions in the literature differ from each other by inconsequential conventions. Here we follow the conventions of [FW20].

39 We now state the main result of this section: an O(t−1) and O(k−1) convergence rate for mo-ment polytope optimization using the Hadamard mirror flow and descent, respectively. Remark-ably, the constant in the O notation depends on the K-invariant logarithmic capacity of a mini-mizer p⋆ of the objective Φ over the moment polytope (as well as the initial norm of the vector and, in the discrete-time case, the inverse step size). As explained following Eq. (6.5), such a min-imizer always exists and by Eq. (6.19) its K-invariant logarithmic capacity log Cap p⋆ (v) is finite. 

Theorem 6.14 (Convergence for moment polytope optimization) . Let 0̸ = v ∈ V . Let ϕ : A → R be a function that satisfies ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3) and s (μ(g · v)) ∈ int dom ϕ for all g ∈ G. Let p ⋆ be a minimizer of ϕ

in ∆(v). Then, the following convergence rates hold: (a) Discrete-time: Let (vk)k∈N be the sequence generated by Eq. (6.10) . Under the step-size condi-tion (6.17) , it holds that, for all k ≥ 1,

ϕ(s(μ(vk))) − min  

> p∈∆(v)

ϕ(p) ≤ 2 log ∥v∥ − log Cap p⋆ (v)

ηk .

(b) Continuous-time: Assume that Φ is twice continuously differentiable on the interior of its domain and that the solution (xt) to Eq. (6.14) with initial condition x 0 := I is defined for all times t ≥ 0.Then the solution (vt)t to Eq. (6.16) is also defined for all times and it holds that, for all t > 0,

ϕ(s(μ(vt))) − min  

> p∈∆(v)

ϕ(p) ≤ 2 log ∥v∥ − log Cap p⋆ (v)

t .

Proof. For every u ∈ K, choose ξ ≡ X := u† p⋆u (under the identification CP ∞ ∼= H). Then we have 

Q(ξ) = Φ(u† p⋆u) = ϕ(p⋆) = min  

> p∈∆(v)

ϕ(p)

(see Example 3.5 for the first equality). On the other hand, 

f ξ 

> v

(I) − inf  

> x∈P

f ξ 

> v

(x) = 2



log ∥v∥ − log cap u† p⋆ u(v)



.We also know that ϕ(s(μ(vk))) = Q(d fv(xk)) for the descent sequence by Lemma 6.7 (b), while 

ϕ(s(μ(vt))) = Q(d fv(xt)) for the solution to the flow by Lemma 6.9 (b). Thus the theorem follows by applying Theorems 4.4 and 5.5 to ξ ≡ X = u† p⋆u, for every u ∈ K, and taking the infimum over u ∈ K, using log Cap p⋆ (v) = sup u∈K log cap u† p⋆ u(v).Theorem 6.14 depends on two quantities that need to be bounded to obtain concrete conver-gence guarantees: the K-invariant capacity of the (a priori unknown) minimizer p⋆, and a suitable step size η. For the former, polynomial lower bounds can be shown in important cases by combin-ing known p-capacity lower bounds and randomness bounds; this will be discussed in Sections 6.4 and 6.6. For the latter, a useful ingredient is the dual smoothness of the Kempf–Ness functions, which will be established in the following subsection; this allows choosing an appropriate step size for arbitrary smooth objectives Φ by Proposition 5.11. Since the moment map μ : P(V ) → H is continuous and ϕ is l.s.c., the theorem above immedi-ately implies accumulation in projective space: 

Corollary 6.15. Under the hypotheses of Theorem 6.14 (a), any accumulation point of [vk]k∈N is a mini-mizer of Φ ◦ μ = ϕ ◦ s ◦ μ in the orbit closure G · [v] ⊆ P(V ). Under the hypotheses of Theorem 6.14 (b), the same holds for any accumulation point of [vt]t (as t → ∞). 

40 When ϕ is the squared norm, it is known that [vt]t converges [GRS21, Theorem 3.3]. We do not know whether such convergence also holds in the discrete-time case, or for other objectives: 

Question 6.16. Under which hypotheses do [vt]t and [vk]k∈N converge? 

Vectors that arise in applications often possess additional symmetries; for example, a tensor may be invariant under certain local unitaries or under a permutation of its factors (Remark 6.18). In this case, it is natural to ask whether the discrete sequence (vk)k∈N and the continuous flow 

(vt)t∈[0, Tmax ) retain such symmetries. The following proposition shows that every unitary symme-try compatible with the representation and the objective is preserved by both dynamics. 

Proposition 6.17 (Conservation of symmetries) . Let 0̸ = v ∈ V . Let ϕ : A → R be a function that satisfies ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3) and suppose s (μ(g · v)) ∈ int dom ϕ for all g ∈ G. For the assertions concerning the Hadamard mirror flow, assume additionally that Φ is twice continuously differentiable on int dom Φ.Let (vk)k∈N, (vt)t∈[0, Tmax ) be as in Eqs. (6.10) and (6.16) .(a) Let U ∈ U(V ) be a unitary such that Uw = w implies U Π(∇Φ(μ(w))) U† = Π(∇Φ(μ(w))) for all w ∈ V \ { 0} with μ(w) ∈ int dom Φ. If Uv = v, then Uv k = vk (∀k ∈ N) and Uv t = vt (∀t ∈ [0, Tmax )) . (6.20) 

(b) The hypothesis on U in part (a) is satisfied if there exists R ∈ O(H), orthogonal with respect to the Hilbert–Schmidt inner product, such that Φ is R-invariant and U Π(X)U† = Π(RX ) for all X ∈ H.Thus, in this case, if Uv = v then Eq. (6.20) holds. (c) In particular, if u ∈ K satisfies u · v = v, then u · vk = vk (∀k ∈ N) and u · vt = vt (∀t ∈ [0, Tmax )) .

Proof. (a) We prove Uv k = vk for all k by induction. The base case k = 0 holds by assumption since v0 ∝ v. Thus, assume that Uv k = vk. Then, 

Uv k+1 = ck+1Ue − η  

> 2Π(∇Φ(μ(vk)))

vk = ck+1e− η  

> 2UΠ(∇Φ(μ(vk))) U†

Uv k = ck+1e− η  

> 2Π(∇Φ(μ(vk)))

vk = vk+1,where the first and last equalities follow from Eq. (6.10) and π(eX ) = eΠ(X) for X ∈ H, the second equality uses Ue MU† = eUMU †

, and the penultimate equality follows from our assumption and the induction hypothesis. To prove that Uv t = vt for all t ∈ [0, Tmax ), we observe that the vector field defining the flow preserves the fixed-point subspace of U: if Uw = w, then the vector field Vw := − 12 Π(∇Φ(μ(w))) w

at that point satisfies UV w = Vw directly from our assumption on U. By ODE uniqueness, it fol-lows that the solution starting at v = Uv remains in this subspace. (b) For every w ∈ V \ { 0} and X ∈ H, we have tr [μ(Uw )X] = ⟨Uw , Π(X)Uw ⟩⟨w, w⟩ = ⟨w, Π(R−1X)w⟩⟨w, w⟩ = tr 

h

μ(w)



R−1X

i 

= tr [( Rμ(w)) X],where the first and the penultimate equalities follow from the definition (6.1) of the moment map; the second equality uses the unitarity of U and our assumption on its relation to R, and the last equality uses the orthogonality of R with respect to the Hilbert–Schmidt inner product. Thus: 

μ(Uw ) = Rμ(w) (∀w ∈ V \ { 0}). (6.21) 41 Next, we observe that the R-invariance of Φ implies the R-equivariance of its gradient: 28 

∇Φ(RX ) = R ∇Φ(X) (∀X ∈ int dom Φ). (6.22) To see this, note that for every Y ∈ H,tr [∇Φ(RX ) Y] = dΦ(RX )[ Y] = dΦ(X)

h

R−1Y

i

= tr 

h

∇Φ(X)



R−1Y

i 

= tr [( R ∇Φ(X)) Y],where the second equality follows from the chain rule applied to Φ = Φ ◦ R. Using Eqs. (6.21) and (6.22) and our assumption on the relation between U and R, we obtain 

UΠ(∇Φ(μ(w))) U† = Π(R∇Φ(μ(w))) = Π(∇Φ(Rμ(w))) = Π(∇Φ(μ(Uw ))) ,for every w ∈ V \ { 0} such that μ(w) ∈ int dom Φ. Thus the hypothesis in part (a) is satisfied. (c) This follows at once from part (b) applied to U := π(u) ∈ U(V ) and R(X) := uXu †. The map Φ is R-invariant by ( Φ2), which is equivalent to assumption ( ϕ2), and we have UΠ(X)U† =

π(u)Π(X)π(u)† = Π(uXu †) = Π(RX ) by K-equivariance of the Lie algebra action. 

Remark 6.18. In addition to the symmetries induced by elements of K, Proposition 6.17 applies to “exter-nal” symmetries, such as permutations of tensor factors. Consider, for example, the tensor action discussed in Section 6.4 when all factors have the same dimension, that is, the canonical action of G := GL (n)d on 

V := ( Cn)⊗d (or on tensor tuples). Any permutation σ ∈ Sd gives rise to a unitary U σ ∈ U(V ), which acts by permuting the tensor factors, and to an orthogonal transformation R σ ∈ O(H), which acts by per-muting the components of H = Herm (n)⊕d. These satisfy U σΠ(X)U† 

> σ

= Π(Rσ X) for all X ∈ H. Thus, whenever a tensor v ∈ V and the objective ϕ (equivalently, Φ) are invariant under a permutation σ, this symmetry is preserved throughout the Hadamard mirror descent sequence (vk)k∈N and flow (vt)t∈[0, Tmax ).This applies, in particular, to objective functions of the form ϕsum that we will consider later; see Eq. (6.46) .

6.3 Smoothness and dual-smoothness of Kempf–Ness functions 

It is known that Kempf–Ness functions are smooth. However, we require dual-smoothness as de-fined in Definition 5.10 to control the step size of Hadamard mirror descent. We will now show that Kempf–Ness functions are dual-smooth with a natural parameter (Theorem 6.21). Although not required for our applications, we also determine the optimal smoothness parameter, improv-ing on the known results in the literature [BFG +19, HS24], and show that in the Hadamard setting, these two parameters are in general distinct (Proposition 6.20 and Example 6.23). As in the pre-ceding subsections, we assume that π : G → GL (V ) is a representation of a connected self-adjoint subgroup G ⊆ GL (n).

Definition 6.19 (Weight diameter and norm) . We define the weight diameter of the representation 

π : G → GL (V ), with associated Lie algebra representation Π : Lie (G) → L(V ), as D(π) := max  

> X∈H,∥X∥F=1

 λmax (Π(X)) − λmin (Π(X))  = 2 max  

> X∈H,∥X∥F=1

min  

> s∈R

∥Π(X) − sI ∥op ,

where λmax and λmin denote the largest and smallest eigenvalues of a Hermitian operator, respectively. The 

weight norm of π is defined as N(π) := ∥Π∥F→op = max  

> X∈H,∥X∥F=1

∥Π(X)∥op . 

> 28 We already used this fact in the proof of Lemma 6.7 in the special case of the K-action.

42 The terminology is motivated by the notion of weights in representation theory: one can associate to π a finite set of vectors in a Euclidean space, called the set of weights ; then D(π) is the diameter of this set, while N(π) is the maximal norm of any element in the set. 29 Consistent with this interpretation, but also directly from the definition, these are related by 

D(π) ≤ 2N(π). (6.23) In general, this bound is strict (see Example 6.23 below). The weight norm was defined in [BFG +19], where it was shown that the Kempf–Ness func-tion fv is N(π)2-smooth; see [BFG +19, Prop. 3.13] (but note that their Riemannian metric differs by a constant factor) or [HS24, Lem. 4.2 (1)]. We believe the weight diameter has not been defined before; however, it is a natural quantity that generalizes the diameter of the Newton polytope, which appeared as a condition number in [BLNW20]. We will now show that the Kempf–Ness function fv is in fact D(π)2/4-smooth, which is optimal. 

Proposition 6.20 (Smoothness of Kempf–Ness functions) . Let π : G → GL (V ) be as above. Then the Kempf–Ness function f v is D (π)2/4 -smooth for all v ∈ V \ { 0}. That is: 

d2

dt2 fv



ge Xt g†

≤ D(π)2

4 ∥X∥2F (t ∈ R, g ∈ G, X ∈ H). (6.24) 

Moreover, this is optimal: no smaller constant satisfies (6.24) for all v ∈ V \ { 0}.Proof. By the G-equivariance fv(g† xg ) = fg·v(x), it suffices to show Eq. (6.24) for g = I and t = 0. Thus, define h : R → R by h(t) := fv(eXt ) = log ⟨v, e ˜Xt v⟩, where ˜X := Π(X). We may further assume that ∥v∥ = 1, since rescaling v only changes h by an additive constant, which does not impact the derivatives. The first derivative is h′(t) = ⟨v, ˜ Xe ˜Xt v⟩⟨v,e ˜Xt v⟩ and hence, using ∥v∥ = 1, 

h′′ (0) = ⟨v, ˜ X2v⟩ − ⟨ v, ˜ Xv ⟩2 .This “variance-type” expression is invariant under substituting ˜ X 7 → ˜X − sI for any s ∈ R. Thus: 

h′′ (0) ≤ min  

> s∈R

⟨v, ( ˜X − sI )2v⟩ ≤ min  

> s∈R

∥ ˜X − sI ∥2op ≤ D(π)2

4 ∥X∥2F (6.25) from the definition of the weight diameter. This proves the desired smoothness. To see that this cannot be improved, choose X ∈ H with ∥X∥F = 1 that achieves the weight diameter, i.e., D(π) = λmax (Π(X)) − λmin (Π(X)) . If D(π) = 0 there is nothing to show. Other-wise, λmax (Π(X)) > λmin (Π(X)) , so we can find orthonormal eigenvectors vmax and vmin of Π(X)

corresponding to these eigenvalues. Then v = 1√2 (vmax + vmin ) saturates Eq. (6.25).   

> 29 We briefly sketch the connection. As discussed in Section 2.3, every matrix X

∈ H is conjugate to one in the Cartan subspace A by a unitary in K. Thus D(π) and N(π) can be computed by maximizing over elements X ∈ A. Now,   

> Ais a linear space consisting of pairwise commuting Hermitian operators, hence the same is true for its image Π

(A) 

> under the Lie algebra representation; we may thus jointly diagonalize the operators in Π

(A). Because Π is linear, the eigenvalue of Π(X) on each common eigenspace must depend linearly on X ∈ A. In other words, there exists a finite set of so-called weights Ω ⊆ A∗ such that V = L 

> ω∈Ω

Vω and each Π(X) acts on the weight subspace Vω by multiplication by ω(X). Equip A∗ with the inner product inherited from A. Then it is easy to see that D(π) = max ω,ω′ ∈Ω∥ω − ω′∥,while N(π) = max ω∈Ω∥ω∥.

43 Next, we show that fv is also dual-smooth with parameter D(π)2/2 (which is twice the optimal smoothness parameter determined above). We caution that this dual-smoothness parameter is not 

in general optimal: e.g., if G is commutative, then P is Euclidean, and hence smoothness and dual-smoothness coincide (as discussed in Section 5.3). 30 However, Theorem 6.21 is still tight in the sense that there are representations such that no smaller constant is valid for all vectors (we give such an example in Example 6.23 below). 

Theorem 6.21 (Dual smoothness of Kempf–Ness functions) . Let π : G → GL (V ) be as above. Then the Kempf–Ness function f v is D (π)2/2 -dual-smooth for all v ∈ V \ { 0}. That is: 31 

∥d fv(y) − τ∗

> y→x

d fv(x)∥2 ≤ D(π)2 

fv(x) − fv(y) − d fv(y)

h

exp −1 

> y

x

i 

(x, y ∈ P). (6.26) 

Proof. By the G-equivariance fv(g† xg ) = fg·v(x), it suffices to show Eq. (6.26) for y = I. We may further assume that ∥v∥ = 1, since rescaling v only changes fv by an additive constant, which does not impact Eq. (6.26). We start by computing the difference of cotangent vectors on the left-hand side: using Lemma 6.5 (b), we find that, for any Z ∈ H,

(d fv(I) − τ∗

> I→x

d fv(x)) [ Z] = ⟨v, Π(Z)v⟩ − ⟨ w, Π(Z)w⟩ = tr 

h

Π(Z)



vv † − ww †i 

,where w = ( x1/2 · v)/∥x1/2 · v∥. Because vv † − ww † is traceless, this expression is invariant under substituting Π(Z) 7 → Π(Z) − sI for any s ∈ R. Thus: 

∥d fv(I) − τ∗

> I→x

d fv(x)∥2 = max  

> Z∈H,∥Z∥F=1

min  

> s∈R

tr 

h

(Π(Z) − sI )



vv † − ww †i 2

≤ D(π)2

4 ∥vv † − ww †∥2tr 

by duality and the definition of the weight diameter. On the other hand: 14 ∥vv † − ww †∥2tr = 1 − |⟨ v, w⟩| 2 = 1 − ⟨v, x1/2 · v⟩2

⟨v, x · v⟩ ≤ − log ⟨v, x1/2 · v⟩2

⟨v, x · v⟩ ,where the first equality is the standard formula for the trace norm distance of two rank-one projec-tions in terms of the overlap of the corresponding unit vectors (e.g., [Wat18, (1.186)]); the second equality is obtained by substituting the definition of w; and the final inequality uses the general fact that log s ≤ s − 1 for s ∈ R>0. Write x = eX for some X ∈ H, and consider h(t) := fv(eXt ).This is the restriction of the Kempf–Ness function to a constant-speed geodesic, so it is convex. Thus: 

− log ⟨v, x1/2 · v⟩2

⟨v, x · v⟩ = h(1) − 2h(1/2 ) ≤ h(1) − 2  h(0) + 12 h′(0) = h(1) − h′(0)= fv(x) − fv(I) − d fv(I)[ exp −1 

> I

x],where we first use the definition of h, then its convexity, and in the last two steps we substitute 

h(0) = fv(I) = 0, h(1) = fv(x), and h′(0) = d fv(I)[ X] = d fv(I)[ exp −1 

> I

x]. This proves the desired dual-smoothness. 

> 30 In fact, since the weight system is the same for a group and its maximally commuting subgroup, the optimal dual-smoothness parameter cannot in general be computed from this data alone (without using, e.g., the root system or other information sensitive to the non-commutativity of the group). See Example 6.23 for an explicit example.
> 31 Equation (6.26) is equivalent to the original definition of dual-smoothness in Eq. (5.11) since parallel transport is an isometry. We have also multiplied both sides of the inequality by a factor of 2.

44 The dual-smoothness of the Kempf–Ness function implies an immediate corollary of Theo-rem 6.14. When the objective ϕ is L-smooth, the step size can be set to η = 2/ (D(π)2 L):

Corollary 6.22 (Convergence for smooth moment polytope optimization) . Let 0̸ = v ∈ V . Let 

ϕ : A → R be an L-smooth convex Weyl group invariant function. Let p ⋆ be a minimizer of ϕ in ∆(v). Let 

(vk)k∈N be the sequence generated by Eq. (6.10) with step size 0 < η ≤ 2/ (D(π)2 L). Then, for all k ≥ 1,

ϕ(s(μ(vk))) − min  

> p∈∆(v)

ϕ(p) ≤ 2



log ∥v∥ − log Cap p⋆ (v)



ηk .

In particular, taking η = 2/ (D(π)2 L) gives 

ϕ(s(μ(vk))) − min  

> p∈∆(v)

ϕ(p) ≤ D(π)2 L



log ∥v∥ − log Cap p⋆ (v)



k .We emphasize that log Cap p⋆ (v) is finite by Eq. (6.19), as discussed above Theorem 6.14. 

Proof. Note that any smooth convex Weyl group invariant function satisfies conditions ( ϕ1), ( ϕ2) and ( ϕ3). Moreover, trivially, we have s(μ(g · v)) ∈ int dom ϕ = A for all g ∈ G because smooth functions are finite-valued by assumption. Now, Theorem 6.21 and Propositions 3.6 and 5.11 (c), together with our assumption that ϕ is L-smooth imply that the pair ( fv, Q) is relatively LD (π)2/2-smooth. By Proposition 5.9, it follows that the step-size condition is satisfied with our choice of η.Now the result follows by applying Theorem 6.14. 

Example 6.23. We now exhibit a group and representation such that, for every δ ∈ (0, 1 ), we can find a vector v such that the corresponding Kempf–Ness function f v is 1/2 -smooth, but not (1 − δ)-dual-smooth. This shows that in the Hadamard setting the two parameters can be distinct and establishes the tightness of Theorem 6.21. For n ≥ 2, let G = GL (n) act on V = Cn by matrix-vector multiplication, i.e., π(g) = gand hence Π(X) = X. Then P = PD (n), H = Herm (n), and we see that D(π) = max  

> X∈Herm (n),∥X∥F=1

(λmax (X) − λmin (X)) = √2, (6.27) 

hence f v is 12 -smooth and 1-dual-smooth for every v ∈ V \ { 0} by Proposition 6.20 and Theorem 6.21. We also note that N (π) = 1; thus the inequality (6.23) is strict. We will now show that the dual-smoothness parameter cannot in general be improved. To this end, we consider x = diag (x1, . . . , xn) ∈ PD (n) and y = I; we also assume that ∥v∥ = 1. Then the Bregman divergence reduces to a KL-divergence DPfv (x∥I) = log ⟨v, xv ⟩ − ⟨ v, log (x)v⟩ =

> n

# ∑

> j=1

pj log pj

qj

=: DKL (p∥q)

between p j := |vj|2 and q j := pj xj/ ∑nj=1 pj xj. On the other hand, we can compute the left-hand side as in the proof of Theorem 6.21, except that now Π(X) = X for all X ∈ Herm (n) and hence we obtain an equality: if we set w := x1/2 v/∥x1/2 v∥, then 

12 ∥d fv(I) − τ∗

> I→x

d fv(x)∥2 = 12 ∥vv † − ww †∥2F = 1 − |⟨ v, w⟩| 2

= 1 − ⟨v, x1/2 v⟩2

⟨v, xv ⟩ = 1 −

> n

# ∑

> j=1

ppjqj

!2

=: 1 − F2(p, q),45 where F denotes the fidelity or Bhattacharyya coefficient. Thus, we see that the optimal dual-smoothness parameter L v of f v can be lower bounded as Lv ≥ 1 − F2(p, q)

DKL (p∥q) ,

where q ̸ = p is any probability distribution with the same support as p. In particular, consider the vec-tor v ε = ( √1 − ε2, ε, 0, . . . , 0 ), with associated probability distribution p ε = ( 1 − ε2, ε2, 0, . . . , 0 ), as well as q ε = ( 1 − ε, ε, 0, . . . , 0 ) for small ε > 0. Then: DKL (pε∥qε) = ( 1 − ε2) log (1 + ε) + ε2 log ε = ε + o(ε),1 − F2(pε, qε) = 1 −

q 

(1 − ε2)( 1 − ε) + ε3/2 

2

= ε + o(ε),

which shows that L vε ≥ 1 − o(1).

Remark 6.24. The same reasoning as in Example 6.23 shows that the optimal dual-smoothness constant valid simultaneously for all Kempf–Ness functions f v, v ∈ V \ { 0}, associated with a given representa-tion π can be computed as follows: Lπ := sup    

> ∥v∥=1, X∈A,DKL (p∥pX)>012

∥μ(v) − μ(eX/2 · v)∥2F

DKL (p∥pX ) ,

where p ω = ∥vω ∥2 and p X 

> ω

= eω(X) pω / ∑ω′ eω′ (X) pω′ , with v = ∑ω∈Ω vω the weight-space decomposi-tion relative to A, as in Footnote 29. We will not use this further in this paper. 

Finally, we bound the weight diameter and norm for (multi)homogeneous polynomial repre-sentations of products of general linear groups. A representation is called polynomial if each matrix entry of π(g) (the choice of basis is not relevant) is given by a polynomial function of the matrix entries of g ∈ G ⊆ GL (n). The following lemma improves the degree-based smoothness bounds obtained in [BFG +19]. 32 

Lemma 6.25. Let π be a polynomial representation of GL (n1) × · · · × GL (nd) that is multi-homogeneous of degrees m 1, . . . , md, i.e., π(λ1 g1, . . . , λd gd) = λm1 

> 1

· · · λmd 

> d

π(g1, . . . , gd) for all g ℓ ∈ GL (nℓ), λℓ ∈ C×.Then the weight diameter and the weight norm can be bounded as D(π) ≤

vuut2

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

m2 

> ℓ

and N(π) ≤

vuut d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

m2 

> ℓ

.

In particular, the Kempf–Ness functions are 12 (∑d 

> ℓ=1

m2 

> ℓ

)-smooth and (∑d 

> ℓ=1

m2 

> ℓ

)-dual-smooth. Proof. Since π is a polynomial function, it has polynomial growth. To see this, note that as a polynomial function, π can be extended continuously to Cn1×n1 × · · · × Cnd ×nd . Then the multi-homogeneity implies that there exists a constant cπ such that, for all g1, . . . , gd,

∥π(g1, . . . , gd)∥op ≤ cπ

> d

# ∏

> ℓ=1

∥gℓ∥mℓ 

> op

.          

> 32 We give an analytic proof, but Lemma 6.25 can be proved geometrically using the notion of weights. For a multi-homogeneous representation of degrees m1, . . . , md, the weights can be identified with integer tuples ω= ( ω1, . . . , ωd)
> such that each ωℓis in the mℓ-times dilated standard simplex; the latter has diameter at most mℓ
> √2 and its vertices have norm mℓ.

46 Thus, for all X = ( X1, . . . , Xd) ∈ H = Herm (n1) × · · · × Herm (nd) and all t > 0, 

etλmax (Π(X)) = ∥etΠ(X)∥op ≤ cπ

> d

# ∏

> ℓ=1

∥etX ℓ ∥mℓ 

> op

= cπ et ∑d   

> ℓ=1mℓλmax (Xℓ)

.Letting t → ∞, we see that λmax (Π(X)) ≤ ∑d 

> ℓ=1

mℓλmax (Xℓ). Applying the same argument to −X

gives λmin (Π(X)) ≥ ∑d 

> ℓ=1

mℓλmin (Xℓ). Together: 

λmax (Π(X)) − λmin (Π(X)) ≤

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

mℓ (λmax (Xℓ) − λmin (Xℓ)) 

≤ √2

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

mℓ∥Xℓ∥F ≤ √2

vuut d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

m2 

> ℓ

· ∥ X∥F,using the Cauchy–Schwarz inequality. This proves that D(π) ≤ √2

q

∑d 

> ℓ=1

m2 

> ℓ

. Then the smooth-ness and dual-smoothness bounds follow from Proposition 6.20 and Theorem 6.21. The claim for the weight norm follows in the same manner, using ∥X∥op = max {λmax (X), −λmin (X)}.We note that our bound on the weight diameter is stronger than what is obtained from the bound on the weight norm and Eq. (6.23). In the single-factor case d = 1, the weight norm bound was proved in [BFG +19, Lem. 6.1]. 

6.4 Tensor action and entanglement polytopes 

In this subsection, we specialize the preceding results to a group action that underlies several important applications: the tensor action . Let Ten (n0; n1, . . . , nd) := Cn0 ⊗ Cn1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ Cnd denote the space of (d + 1)-tensors of shape n0 × n1 × · · · × nd. Each element T ∈ Ten (n0; n1, . . . , nd) can also be interpreted as an n0-tuple of tensors T = ( t1, . . . , tn0 ), where each ti ∈ Cn1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ Cnd is a tensor of shape n1 × · · · × nd (i ∈ [n0]). Accordingly, we will call T a tensor tuple (unless n0 = 1). Recall that G = GL (n1) × · · · × GL (nd) is naturally a self-adjoint subgroup of GL (n1 + · · · + nd),with maximal compact subgroup K = U(n1) × · · · × U(nd) (Example 2.1). 

Definition 6.26 (Tensor action) . The tensor action of GL (n1) × · · · × GL (nd) is the representation π

on Ten (n0; n1, . . . , nd) given by 

(g1, . . . , gd) · T := π(g1, . . . , gd)T := ( I ⊗ g1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ gd)T. (6.28) 

If we think of T = ( ti) as a tuple, then g · T = ( t′ 

> i

) is the tuple of tensors t ′ 

> i

= ( g1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ gd)ti.

The weight diameter of this representation is bounded by D(π) ≤ √2d because it is multilinear (Lemma 6.25). Recall also that H = Herm (n1) × · · · × Herm (nd).The moment map corresponding to the tensor action computes the normalized (one-body) quan-tum marginals of the tensor tuple T (which can be thought of as a multipartite quantum state): 

μ : Ten (n0; n1, . . . , nd) \ { 0} → PSD (n1) × · · · × PSD (nd),

μ(T) = T(1) T(1)†

∥T∥2 , . . . , T(d) T(d)†

∥T∥2

!

, (6.29) 47 where T(ℓ) : N 

> j∈{ 0,1,..., d}\{ ℓ}

Cnj → Cnℓ denotes the ℓ-th principal flattening of a tensor T ∈ Cn0 ⊗

Cn1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ Cnd . Regarding T = ( ti)i∈[n0] as a tensor tuple, we have T(ℓ) T(ℓ)† = ∑i∈[n0] t(ℓ) 

> i

t(ℓ)† 

> i

. To make the connection to quantum information theory explicit, we note that the moment map only depends on the positive-semidefinite density operator ρ := ∑n0 

> i=1

tit† 

> i

/∥T∥2 on Cn1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ Cnd . Then 

μ(T)ℓ = ρℓ, where ρℓ := tr ˇℓ ρ (6.30) and the operation tr ˇℓ denotes the partial trace over all but the ℓ-th tensor factor; it is defined for arbitrary operators M ∈ L(Cn1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ Cnd ) by 

(tr ˇℓ M)i,j := ∑  

> i1∈[n1],..., iℓ−1∈[nℓ−1],
> iℓ+1∈[nℓ+1],..., id∈[nd]

M(i1,..., iℓ−1,i,iℓ+1,..., id ),(i1,..., iℓ−1,j,iℓ+1,..., id ). (6.31) The density operator ρ describes a quantum state of d particles, and ρℓ describes the quantum state of the ℓ-th particle ( ℓ ∈ [d]); the normalized tensor T/∥T∥ is a so-called purification of ρ.As in Example 2.1, we take the Cartan subspace A to be the tuples of real diagonal matrices, and the Weyl chamber C ⊆ A to be the tuples of diagonal matrices with nonincreasing entries. Hence, we may naturally identify A ∼= Rn1 × · · · × Rnd and C ∼= Rn1 

> ↓

× · · · × Rnd 

> ↓

. Then the moment polytope ∆(T), which in this setting is called the entanglement polytope [WDGC13] of T, is 

∆(T) = 

 

spec S(1)S(1)†

∥S∥2 , . . . , spec S(d)S(d)†

∥S∥2



S = ( I ⊗ g1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ gd)T, gℓ ∈ GL (nℓ)



. (6.32) As a special case of (6.5), we now consider convex optimization on the entanglement polytope: minimize ϕ(p) over p ∈ ∆(T), (6.33) for an objective ϕ : Rn1 × · · · × Rnd → R satisfying ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3) in Example 3.7. Then Hadamard mir-ror descent leads to the following iteration of tensor tuples (Tk)k∈N as a special case of Eqs. (6.10) and (6.13): 

Tk+1 := ck+1 I ⊗

> d

O

> ℓ=1

e− η   

> 2∇ℓΦ(μ(Tk))

!

Tk = ck+1 I ⊗

> d

O

> ℓ=1

u† 

> ℓ

e− η  

> 2diag (∇ℓϕ(p))

uℓ

!

Tk, T0 := c0T,(6.34) where the ck ∈ C× are arbitrary nonzero scalars, and ∇ℓΦ denotes the ℓ-th component of the gradient ( ℓ ∈ [d]); in the second formula, the unitaries uℓ ∈ U(nℓ) are chosen to diagonalize the quantum marginals, i.e., uℓμ(Tk)ℓu† 

> ℓ

= diag (pℓ) for pℓ ∈ Rnℓ , and we denote p = ( p1, . . . , pd).Using these formulas, we can now state concrete versions of Theorem 6.14 and Corollary 6.22 in this setting. For conciseness, we only present the discrete-time results. 

Theorem 6.27 (Convergence for entanglement polytope optimization) . Let 0̸ = T ∈ Ten (n0; n1, . . . , nd).Let ϕ : Rn1 × · · · × Rnd → R be a function that satisfies ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3) and spec μ(g · T) ∈ int dom ϕ for all g ∈ GL (n1) × · · · × GL (nd). Let p ⋆ be a minimizer of ϕ in ∆(T). Let (Tk)k∈N be the sequence of tensor tuples generated by Eq. (6.34) . Under the step-size condition (6.17) , it holds that, for all k ≥ 1,

ϕ(spec μ(Tk)) − min  

> p∈∆(T)

ϕ(p) ≤ 2 log ∥T∥ − log Cap p⋆ (T)

ηk .

Moreover, if ϕ is L-smooth, then the step size can be taken as η = 1/ (dL ).

48 Proof. This follows immediately from Theorem 6.14 and Corollary 6.22 and the formulas above, including the bound D(π) ≤ √2d on the weight diameter from Lemma 6.25. Importantly, for tensor tuples with Gaussian integer entries, 33 i.e., entries in Z[i], we are able to give a lower bound on the K-invariant logarithmic capacity that is polynomial in the bit-length of the tensor tuples and applies uniformly to any point in the entanglement polytope. 

Theorem 6.28 (Polynomial iteration bound for Gaussian integer tensors) . Let n max := max d 

> ℓ=1

nℓ. Then, 

− log Cap p(T) ≤ poly (d, nmax )

for all tensor tuples 0̸ = T ∈ Ten (n0; n1, . . . , nd) with Gaussian integer entries and all p ∈ ∆(T).Accordingly, Theorem 6.27 holds with the following convergence bound, where ⟨T⟩ denotes the bit-length of the tensor tuple T: 

ϕ(spec μ(Tk)) − min  

> p∈∆(T)

ϕ(p) ≤ 1

ηk poly (d, nmax , ⟨T⟩).The proof is given at the end of this subsection. It relies on a combination of results from the literature [BFG +18, vdBCL +25a], as well as the following lemma. 

Lemma 6.29. Let g ∈ GL (n) be such that each entry g ij is an integer with absolute value at most S ≥ 1.Then, d(I, g† g) ≤ 2n3/2 log (nS ).Proof. We first assume that n ≥ 2. We have ∥g∥op ≤ ∥ g∥F ≤ nS . Hence, the singular val-ues σ1, . . . , σn of g are upper bounded by nS . Since |det g| ≥ 1 ( g is an integer matrix) and equals the product of all n singular values, every singular value is also lower bounded by (nS )−(n−1).Thus: d(I, g† g) = ∥log (g† g)∥F = 2

s n

# ∑

> i=1

(log σi)2 ≤ 2√n(n − 1) log (nS ) ≤ 2n3/2 log (nS ),which proves the claim when n ≥ 2. For n = 1, we have d (I, g† g) = |log (|g11 |2)| ≤ 2 log (S).We will also use the following bound on the p-capacity for points in the Cartan subspace. 34 

Proposition 6.30 ([BFG +18, Thm. 2.13]) . Let 0̸ = T ∈ Ten (n0; n1, . . . , nd) have Gaussian integer entries. Then, for all p ∈ A = diag (Rn1 ) × · · · × diag (Rnd ), it holds that 

log cap p(T) > −∞ ⇐⇒ log cap p(T) ≥ − 

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

log nℓ.  

> 33 As an easy consequence, the bound on the objective gap also holds for tensors with Gaussian rational entries.
> 34 The theorem in [BFG +18] is stated for integer tensor tuples and pin a specific Weyl chamber (

−C in our conven-tions, corresponding to reversing each component of p), and the highest-weight argument given there a priori only applies to rational p. It applies equally to Gaussian integer tensor tuples because a nonzero Gaussian integer has ab-solute value at least one. The case of general (irrational) p follows from the concavity of the logarithmic capacity on a Weyl chamber and the rationality of the Borel polytope; see, e.g., [BFG +18, App. A.1]. Finally, the result extends to the entire Cartan subspace A by applying Eq. (6.18) with tuples of permutation matrices, which preserve the integrality of the entries. 

49 We need to bound log Cap p(T), which is defined as the supremum of log cap p(u · T) over u ∈ K.However, u · T will not in general be integral and hence Proposition 6.30 cannot be directly ap-plied. Instead, we will apply Proposition 6.30 to g · T, where g is a tuple of integer matrices. From Proposition 6.12, we know that there exists u ∈ K such that log cap p(u · T) > −∞ if and only if there exists g ∈ G such that log cap p(g · T) > −∞. Prior work has shown that if one chooses g as a tuple of random integer matrices whose entries have polynomially-bounded bit-length, then log cap p(g · T) > −∞ follows with high probability; see [BFG +18, Cor. 2.7], [vdBCL +25a, Thm. 3.6]. The latter reference states such a result uniformly for p ∈ ∆(T).35 

Proposition 6.31 ([vdBCL +25a, Thm. 3.6]) . There exists an integer S ≥ 1 such that log S ≤ poly (d, nmax )

with the following property: Let 0̸ = T ∈ Ten (n0; n1, . . . , nd) be a tensor tuple. Let g = ( g1, . . . , gd) be a random tuple of integer matrices, with each matrix entry drawn independently uniformly at random from [S]. Then, with probability at least 1/2 , it holds that g ∈ GL (n1) × · · · × GL (nd) and 

∆(T) = {p ∈ C | log cap p(g · T) > −∞}.We now prove the desired lower bound on the K-invariant logarithmic p-capacity. 

Proof of Theorem 6.28. Let S ≥ 1, log S ≤ poly (d, nmax ) be the constant from Proposition 6.31. The proposition ensures that for every tensor tuple T there exists a tuple g = ( g1, . . . , gd) of invert-ible matrices in GL (n1) × · · · × GL (nd) whose entries are positive integers at most S and such that log cap p(g · T) > −∞ for all p ∈ ∆(T). Since g · T has Gaussian integer entries, using Propo-sition 6.30 it follows that, in fact, log cap p(g · T) ≥ − 

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

log nℓ (p ∈ ∆(T)) . (6.35) We can obtain from this a lower bound on log cap p(u · T) for some u ∈ K = U(n1) × · · · × U(nd),which in turn is a lower bound on log Cap p(T). By Lemma 2.2, the geodesic t 7 → g†etp g is asymp-totic to t 7 → etu † pu for some u ∈ K. Then, bp(x) − bu† pu (g† xg ) = : c is a constant, which we can upper bound as 

c = bp(I) − bu† pu (g† g) = −bu† pu (g† g) = −

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

bu†   

> ℓpℓuℓ

(g† 

> ℓ

gℓ)

≤

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

∥pℓ∥F d(I, g† 

> ℓ

gℓ) ≤

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

2n3/2  

> ℓ

log (nℓS) ≤ 2dn 3/2 max log (nmax S) ≤ poly (d, nmax ), (6.36) where we recall that we fixed the constant in the Busemann functions as bX (I) = 0; the first inequality follows from the fact that bX is ∥X∥F-Lipschitz continuous, and the second inequality holds because ∥pℓ∥F ≤ ∥ pℓ∥tr ≤ 1 for every ℓ (from Eq. (6.32)) and Lemma 6.29. Thus: 2 log Cap p(T) ≥ 2 log cap u† pu (T) = inf  

> x∈P

f u† pu T (x) = inf  

> x∈P

f pg·T (x) − c, (6.37) and the right-hand side can be bounded using Eqs. (6.35) and (6.36).       

> 35 Although the proof of [vdBCL +25a, Thm. 3.6] is written for d=3 and n0=1, it readily generalizes. We remark that while the proof in [vdBCL +25a] uses arbitrary matrices (as in Proposition 6.31), their theorem statement uses upper triangular random matrices; the statement holds in either case using the same Schwartz–Zippel argument.

50 We expect that the bound in Theorem 6.28 may not be tight. This is because, in the proof above, we used a probabilistic claim merely to certify the existence of a suitably generic group element g ∈ G. For instance, in situations where one can choose g to be a tuple of permutation matrices, we have c = 0 in the proof and we obtain a much improved bound. 

6.5 Tensor power action and symmetric entanglement polytopes 

Another important action on tensor tuples with n1 = · · · = nd =: n is the tensor power action of GL (n). It corresponds to the restriction of the tensor action to the subgroup GL (n) ⊆ GL (n)d :=

GL (n) × · · · × GL (n) under the diagonal embedding. We annotate most objects associated to this action with a subscript “S” (for “symmetric”); however, the tensors do not need to be symmetric. 

Definition 6.32 (Tensor power action) . The tensor power action of GL (n) on Ten (n0; n, . . . , n

| {z }

> d times

) is the representation πS given by g · T := πS(g)T := ( I ⊗ g⊗d)T = ( I ⊗ g ⊗ · · · ⊗ g)T. (6.38) 

If we think of T = ( ti) as a tuple, then g · T = ( t′ 

> i

) is the tuple of tensors t ′ 

> i

= g⊗dti.

The weight diameter of this representation is bounded by D(πS) ≤ d√2 because it is homoge-neous of degree d (Lemma 6.25). The associated moment map μS computes the sum of the one-body quantum marginals, as follows from Eq. (6.29): 

μS : Ten (n0; n, . . . , n) \ { 0} → PSD (n), μS(T) = 

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

T(ℓ) T(ℓ)†

∥T∥2 . (6.39) Thus, the associated moment polytope, called the symmetric entanglement polytope of T, is given by 

∆S(T) = 

(

spec 

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

S(ℓ)S(ℓ)†

∥S∥2 S = ( I ⊗ g ⊗ · · · ⊗ g)T, g ∈ GL (n)

)

⊆ Rn 

> ↓

. (6.40) We consider the problem of convex optimization over the symmetric entanglement polytope: minimize ϕ(p) over p ∈ ∆S(T), (6.41) for an objective ϕ : Rn → R satisfying ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3) in Example 3.7 (for P = PD (n)). Then Hadamard mirror descent amounts to the following update formula for tensor tuples (Tk)k∈N, analogous to Eq. (6.34), as a special case of Eqs. (6.10) and (6.13): 

Tk+1 := ck+1



I ⊗



e− η  

> 2∇Φ(μS(Tk))

⊗d

Tk = ck+1



I ⊗



u†e− η  

> 2diag ∇ϕ(p)

u

⊗d

Tk, T0 := c0T,(6.42) where the ck ∈ C× are arbitrary nonzero scalars; in the second formula, the unitary u ∈ U(n) is chosen to diagonalize the moment map, i.e., uμS(Tk)u† = diag (p) for p ∈ Rn.We now observe that the tensor power action case can be interpreted as a special case of the tensor action case; this will allow us to leverage the results of the preceding subsection. For a tensor tuple T = ( ti)i∈[n0] ∈ Ten (n0; n, . . . , n), consider the cyclic index shifts of each ti, defined as shift a : (Cn)⊗d → (Cn)⊗d, (shift a t)j1,..., jd := tj[1+a]d ,..., j[d+a]d

(a ∈ [d]) ,where [·]d denotes the residue in [d] modulo d, and stack them all into a single tuple indexed by pairs (a, i) ∈ [d] × [n0] ∼= [ dn 0]:51 Definition 6.33. We define the shift stack of a tensor tuple T = ( ti)i∈[n0] ∈ Ten (n0; n, . . . , n) by Tshift := ( shift a ti)a∈[d],i∈[n0] ∈ Ten (dn 0; n, . . . , n).By an easy calculation, the image of Tshift under the moment map (6.29) for the tensor action of GL (n)d on Ten (dn 0; n, . . . , n) is given by: 

μ(Tshift ) = 1

d (μS(T), . . . , μS(T)

| {z }

> d

). (6.43) Furthermore, it is clear that 

(g, . . . , g) · Tshift = ( g · T)shift (g ∈ GL (n)) . (6.44) Therefore, the symmetric entanglement polytope ∆S(T) is “included” in the entanglement poly-tope ∆(Tshift ) in the sense that 

p ∈ ∆S(T) ⇒ 1

d (p, . . . , p

| {z }

> d

) ∈ ∆(Tshift ). (6.45) Let us extend the objective function ϕ : Rn → R to (Rn)d by 

ϕsum : (Rn)d → R, ϕsum (p1, . . . , pd) := 1

d

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

ϕ(dp ℓ); (6.46) then ϕsum satisfies the conditions ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3). Its unitarily invariant extension Φsum is given by the analogous formula. Moreover, ϕ is L-smooth if and only if ϕsum is dL -smooth. By the inclu-sion (6.45), it follows that min  

> p∈∆S(T)

ϕ(p) ≥ min  

> p∈∆(Tshift )

ϕsum (p).In fact, the two values always coincide. This follows from the observation that our algorithms for the two minimization problems coincide: 

Theorem 6.34. Let 0̸ = T ∈ Ten (n0; n, . . . , n). Let ϕ : Rn → R be a function satisfying ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3) and 

spec μS(g · T) ∈ int dom ϕ for all g ∈ GL (n). Let (Tk)k∈N be the sequence of tensor tuples generated by (6.42) , and let (( Tshift )k)k∈N be the sequence of tensor tuples in Ten (dn 0; n, . . . , n) generated by (6.34) 

for the objective ϕsum , with the same step size and scalars c k, starting at (Tshift )0 := c0Tshift .(a) Then (Tshift )k = ( Tk)shift for all k ∈ N.(b) The following two minimization problems have the same value: 

min  

> p∈∆S(T)

ϕ(p) = min  

> p∈∆(Tshift )

ϕsum (p).

This equality holds even if there does not exist any step size satisfying the step-size condition. (c) ϕ(spec μS(Tk)) → min  

> p∈∆S(T)

ϕ(p) if and only if ϕsum (spec μ(( Tshift )k)) → min  

> p∈∆(Tshift )

ϕsum (p).(d) The step-size conditions (6.17) for (Tk)k∈N and (( Tshift )k)k∈N are equivalent. 

As a consequence of (b), minimization on the symmetric entanglement polytope reduces to the minimization over the entanglement polytope of the shift-stack tensor tuple. 52 Proof. (a) This follows by induction. The base case holds by definition. Thus, assume that (Tshift )k =(Tk)shift for some k. Then: 

(Tk+1)shift = ck+1



I ⊗



e− η  

> 2∇Φ(μS(Tk))

⊗d

(Tk)shift 

= ck+1 I ⊗

> d

O

> ℓ=1

e− η   

> 2∇ℓΦsum (μ(( Tshift )k))

!

(Tshift )k = ( Tshift )k+1,using Eqs. (6.42) and (6.44), then the induction hypothesis, Eq. (6.43), and the fact that ∇Φ(dX ) = 

∇ℓΦsum (X, . . . , X) for ℓ ∈ [d] and X ∈ Herm (n), and finally we use Eq. (6.34). (b) We first assume that ϕ is L-smooth. Then ϕsum is dL -smooth. Recall also that D(πS) ≤ d√2, while D(π) ≤ √2d. Thus, η = 1/ (Ld 2) satisfies the step-size condition for both minimization problems, and our convergence result (Corollary 6.22) implies that lim  

> k→∞

ϕ(spec μS(Tk)) = min  

> p∈∆S(T)

ϕ(p) and lim  

> k→∞

ϕsum (spec μ(( Tshift )k)) = min  

> p∈∆(Tshift )

ϕsum (p).But ϕsum (spec μ(( Tshift )k)) = ϕ(spec μS(Tk)) for all k by part (a) and Eqs. (6.43) and (6.46). We conclude that the two minima must be equal. We now consider the case where ϕ is not smooth. In this case, we may consider its smoothing, known as the Moreau envelope of ϕ (e.g., [RW98, §1.G]): for λ > 0, it is defined as 

Eλϕ : Rn → R, Eλϕ(p) := inf  

> q∈Rn

ϕ(q) + 12λ ∥p − q∥2.Since Eλϕ is 1/ λ-smooth [RW98, Thm. 2.26], we have the desired equality for Eλϕ in place of ϕ.Moreover, directly from the definition, it follows that (Eλϕ)sum = Eλ/d(ϕsum ). Then, by taking the limit as λ → 0, and using the fact that the minimum of the Moreau envelope on a compact set converges to the minimum of the original convex l.s.c. function, 36 we have the desired result. (c) This follows immediately from (a) and (b). (d) The right-hand sides of (6.17) coincide for the two sequences, since, for all k ∈ N, we have 

∥(Tshift )k+1∥2

|ck+1|2∥(Tshift )k∥2 = ∥(Tk+1)shift ∥2

|ck+1|2∥(Tk)shift ∥2 = ∥Tk+1∥2

|ck+1|2∥Tk∥2 ,where the former equality follows from part (a) and the latter equality holds because ∥Sshift ∥2 =

d∥S∥2 for any S ∈ Ten (n0; n, . . . , n) directly from Definition 6.33. The left-hand sides of (6.17) also coincide for the two sequences, because we have Φsum (μ(( Tshift )k)) = Φ(μS(Tk)) by part (a) and Eqs. (6.43) and (6.46), and we have tr [μ(( Tshift )k)∇Φsum (μ(( Tshift )k))] = tr [μS(Tk)∇Φ(μS(Tk))] by part (a), Eq. (6.43), and the fact that ∇Φ(dX ) = ∇ℓΦsum (X, . . . , X) for all ℓ ∈ [d] and X ∈ Herm (n)

used already in part (a). Thus the step-size condition (6.17) coincides for the two sequences of tensor tuples. 

> 36

This is proved as follows. We show that lim λ→0 min p∈C Eλϕ(p) = min p∈C ϕ(p) for a compact set C. From Eλϕ ≤ ϕ

it follows that lim λ→0 min p∈C Eλϕ(p) ≤ min p∈C ϕ(p). Let p⋆ 

> λ

∈ C be a minimizer of Eλϕ and p⋆ ∈ C be an accumulation point as λ → 0; for simplicity in notation, we assume that p⋆ 

> λ

→ p⋆. By the definition of the Moreau envelope, there exists qλ ∈ Rn such that ϕ(qλ) ≤ Eλϕ(p⋆

> λ

) − ∥ qλ − p⋆

> λ

∥2/(2λ) + ε for any fixed ε > 0. From this, we can conclude 

∥qλ − p⋆

> λ

∥2 → 0. Since ϕ is convex, it is lower bounded by some affine linear function ϕ(p) ≥ c + ⟨u, p⟩. Then we have ∥qλ − p⋆

> λ

∥2 ≤ 2λ(Eλϕ(p⋆

> λ

) + ε − c − ⟨ u, qλ⟩) and equivalently ∥qλ + λu − p⋆

> λ

∥2 ≤ 2λ(Eλϕ(p⋆

> λ

) + ε − c − ⟨ u, p⋆

> λ

⟩) + 

λ2∥u∥2 → 0; Eλϕ(p⋆

> λ

) is uniformly bounded since it is at most min p∈C ϕ(p), while the compactness of C uniformly bounds ⟨u, p⋆

> λ

⟩. Hence, qλ → p⋆. Since ϕ is l.s.c., ϕ(p⋆) ≤ lim inf λ→0 ϕ(qλ) ≤ lim inf λ→0 Eλϕ(p⋆

> λ

) + ε for any ε > 0. 

53 In particular, we obtain the following corollary of Theorems 6.27 and 6.28. We emphasize again that the following results do not require the tensors to be symmetric. 

Corollary 6.35 (Convergence for symmetric entanglement polytope optimization) . Let 0̸ = T ∈

Ten (n0; n, . . . , n). Let ϕ : Rn → R be a function that satisfies ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3) and spec μS(g · T) ∈ int dom ϕ

for all g ∈ GL (n). Let p ⋆ be a minimizer of ϕ in ∆S(T). Let (Tk)k∈N be the sequence of tensor tuples generated by Eq. (6.42) . Under the step-size condition (6.17) , it holds that, for all k ≥ 1,

ϕ(spec μS(Tk)) − min  

> p∈∆S(T)

ϕ(p) ≤ 2 log ∥T∥ − log Cap p⋆ (T)

ηk .

Here, the capacity refers to the tensor power action. If ϕ is L-smooth, we can take the step size η = 1/ (d2 L).If T has Gaussian integer entries, then we can also bound 

ϕ(spec μS(Tk)) − min  

> p∈∆S(T)

ϕ(p) ≤ 1

ηk poly (d, n, ⟨T⟩),

where ⟨T⟩ denotes the bit-length of the tensor tuple T. Proof. Everything but the last statement follows from Theorem 6.14 and Corollary 6.22. For the last statement, first note that spec μS(g · T) ∈ int dom ϕ implies spec μ(( g, . . . , g) · Tshift ) ∈ int dom ϕsum 

for all g ∈ GL (n). By Theorem 6.34 (a), it follows that spec μ(( Tshift )k) ∈ int dom ϕsum for all 

k ∈ N. Moreover, part (d) shows that the sequence (( Tshift )k) satisfies the step-size condition. Consequently, the proof of Theorem 6.27 applies to Tshift and ϕsum , using Theorem 5.5 with the weakened interior-domain hypothesis explained in Remark 5.6. Since Tshift has Gaussian integer entries and its bit-length is polynomially bounded in d and ⟨T⟩, the capacity bound in Theo-rem 6.28 yields the desired polynomial bound for the shifted problem. Finally, parts (a) and (b) of Theorem 6.34, together with Eqs. (6.43) and (6.46), identify the sequences, objectives, and minima; hence the polynomial bound also holds for the original problem involving T and ϕ.In the case of Gaussian integer entries, the capacity of the tensor power action log Cap p⋆ (T) can also be bounded using the general Theorem 6.36 in the next subsection. This yields a polynomial bound with an additional logarithmic dependence on n0.

6.6 Polynomial actions of general linear groups 

In this subsection, we consider a general homogeneous polynomial representation π : GL (n) →

GL (V ) and show a polynomial lower bound on the invariant logarithmic capacity for Gaussian integer vectors. This yields a polynomial iteration bound analogous to Theorem 6.28 for the tensor action. As always, V comes with a U (n)-invariant inner product and norm ∥·∥ . The notion of a Gaussian integer vector depends on a choice of basis, which identifies V ∼= CN . This basis need not be orthonormal with respect to the U (n)-invariant inner product, because we also wish the group action to be given by polynomials with rational coefficients in this basis. Thus we distinguish the original norm ∥·∥ and the ℓ2-norm ∥·∥ 2 with respect to the chosen basis. Following [BFG +19], we consider the following parameters: 37 

• the degree d ≥ 1, i.e., π(zg ) = zdπ(g) for all z ∈ C× and g ∈ GL (n).  

> 37 We follow the notation of [BFG +19]. In particular, in this subsection only, Kwill denote the distortion factor and not the maximal compact subgroup U (n).

54 • the coefficient size R , defined as the least positive integer such that there exists a positive integer R′ ≤ R such that all the rescaled matrix entries R′πij (g) are polynomials in the matrix entries of g, with integer coefficients bounded in absolute value by R. We assume that π has rational coefficients, so that R is well-defined. • the distortion factor K ≥ 1, which is a number such that K−1∥v∥ ≤ ∥ v∥2 ≤ K∥v∥ for all v ∈ CN .An irreducible homogeneous polynomial representation of GL (n) can be specified by a partition of d, and there exists a well-known choice of basis, called the Gelfand–Tsetlin basis ; this extends to general homogeneous polynomial representations in a natural way by using lists of partitions and the corresponding union of bases. If the representation π is specified in this manner and the input vector v has Gaussian integer entries with respect to this basis, then log (KRN ) and the bound in Theorem 6.36 become polynomial in the input size; for details, see [BFG +19, §1.6, §8]. We only state the capacity bound; as in Theorem 6.28, the polynomial iteration bound is an immediate consequence. We also note that the weight diameter can be bounded as D(π) ≤ d√2. 

Theorem 6.36 (Polynomial capacity bound for Gaussian integer vectors) . Let π : GL (n) → GL (N)

be a homogeneous polynomial representation with degree d, coefficient size R, and distortion factor K. Then, 

− log Cap p(v) ≤ O (n5.5 d log (nd ) + log (KRN )) ,

for all vectors 0̸ = v ∈ CN with Gaussian integer entries and all p ∈ ∆(v). If π is specified by a list of partitions and the basis is the Gelfand–Tsetlin basis, then the right-hand side is poly (⟨π⟩ , ⟨v⟩ , d), where 

⟨·⟩ denotes the bit-length. 

The proof of Theorem 6.36 follows the same lines as Theorem 6.28. Instead of Propositions 6.30 and 6.31 we use the following shifted capacity lower bound under randomization: 

Proposition 6.37 ([BFG +19, Thm. 7.24]) . Let S := 4n3n3+1dn4

. Let 0̸ = v ∈ CN have Gaussian integer entries, and let p ∈ ∆(v) ⊆ Rn 

> ↓

. Let g be a random n × n integer matrix with entries drawn independently uniformly at random from [S]. Then, with probability at least 1/2 , we have g ∈ GL (n) and 

− log cap p(g · v) ≤ O (n5d log (nd ) + log (KRN )) . (6.47) We now prove the desired bound on the unitarily invariant logarithmic p-capacity. 

Proof of Theorem 6.36. This proof proceeds analogously to the proof of Theorem 6.28. Proposi-tion 6.37 ensures the existence of g ∈ GL (n) whose entries are positive integers at most S and which satisfies Eq. (6.47). By Lemma 2.2, the geodesic t 7 → g†etp g is asymptotic to t 7 → etu † pu for some u ∈ U(n), and we can upper bound bp(x) − bu† pu (g† xg ) = : c, which is a constant indepen-dent of x ∈ PD (n), as follows: 

c = bp(I) − bu† pu (g† g) = −bu† pu (g† g)

≤ ∥ p∥F d(I, g† g) ≤ 2dn 3/2 log (nS ) ≤ O (n5.5 d log (nd )) (6.48) where the first inequality follows from the Lipschitz continuity of the Busemann function; the second inequality follows from ∥p∥F ≤ N(π) ≤ d and Lemma 6.29; the last inequality follows from the definition of S (except if n = d = 1; here π(z) = zI , p = 1, and the theorem still holds). Using Eqs. (6.47) and (6.48) instead of Eqs. (6.35) and (6.36), we can conclude as in Eq. (6.37). 55 7 Applications 

In this section, we discuss various applications of Hadamard mirror descent. In Section 7.1, we address norm minimization over the moment polytope, and show an O(k−1) convergence rate; previously, such a result was only known in the semistable case (i.e., when the norm minimum is zero). In Section 7.2, we show that the quantum functionals of tensors admit a simple scaling algorithm called entropic tensor scaling , and we establish polynomial iteration complexity for this algorithm. No such algorithm was known before our work. In Section 7.3, we obtain an analogous algorithm and result for the symmetric quantum functional. In Sections 7.4 and 7.5, we address the computation of the G-stable ranks and the non-commutative rank; in these cases, the objective functions are not differentiable and we illustrate how to smooth them. 

7.1 Norm minimization over moment polytopes 

We start with a paradigmatic application that is deeply connected to scaling algorithms and to the non-commutative optimization framework [BFG +19]. We work in the general setting of Section 6 and consider a representation π : G → GL (V ) of a self-adjoint subgroup G ⊆ GL (n). Our goal is to minimize the squared Frobenius norm over the moment polytope ∆(v) of a given vector 

v ∈ V \ { 0}. Equivalently, we wish to minimize the squared Frobenius norm of the moment map over the G-orbit of v.38 Thus, our goal is to compute: min  

> p∈∆(v)
> 12

∥p∥2F = inf  

> g∈G
> 12

∥μ(g · v)∥2F, (7.1) corresponding to the objective ϕ(·) = ∥ · ∥ 2F/2 (or equivalently, Φ(·) = ∥ · ∥ 2F/2). 39 This problem was studied from the perspective of so-called scaling problems (such as matrix, operator and tensor scaling) by Bürgisser et al. [BFG +19]; they pointed out that these can be reduced to the problem of setting the moment map to zero for suitable group actions, and proposed minimizing the asso-ciated Kempf–Ness functions (whose gradient computes the moment map, see Lemma 6.5) as an approach to solving general scaling problems. Hirai and Sakabe [HS24] studied gradient descent in the unbounded case and proved a qualitative convergence result. We first state our result and then compare it to the results of these prior works at the end of this subsection. Since ϕ is 1-smooth, the dual smoothness of the Kempf–Ness functions (Theorem 6.21) guaran-tees that Hadamard mirror descent with the step size η = 2/ D(π)2 solves this problem. Because 

∇Φ is the identity map, Hadamard mirror descent reduces to ordinary Riemannian gradient de-scent. In particular, the corresponding iteration (6.10) reads as follows: 

vk+1 := ck+1π



e− 1  

> D(π)2μ(vk)



vk, v0 := c0v, (7.2) where 0 ̸ = ck ∈ C are arbitrary scalars. Then, by applying the general Corollary 6.22, we have the following convergence result for the norm minimization: 

Theorem 7.1 (Convergence for norm minimization) . Let 0̸ = v ∈ V , and let (vk)k∈N be the sequence generated by Eq. (7.2) . Then, for every k ≥ 1, 

> 12

∥μ(vk)∥2F − min  

> p∈∆(v)
> 12

∥p∥2F ≤ D(π)2



log ∥v∥ − log Cap p⋆ (v)



k ,                

> 38 Recall that we defined the moment polytope (6.3) as a subset of the Weyl chamber C⊆A⊆H⊆Herm (n), and the moment map (6.1) as taking values in H⊆Herm (n).
> 39 The corresponding holonomy-invariant objective is Q=12∥·∥ 2, with ∥·∥ the dual norm on the cotangent bundle induced by the Riemannian metric. See Example 3.2.

56 where p ⋆ is the minimum-norm point in ∆(v).Moreover, in the case of the tensor action, the tensor power action, or an arbitrary homogeneous poly-nomial action of GL (n) (using a suitable input format), for vectors v with Gaussian-integer entries the numerator can be replaced by a bound that is polynomial in the input bit-length, as in Theorems 6.28 and 6.36 and Corollary 6.35. Proof. Since ϕ(·) := ∥ · ∥ 2F/2 is a 1-smooth convex Weyl group invariant function, the displayed bound follows from Corollary 6.22 and the fact that ∥s(μ(vk)) ∥F = ∥μ(vk)∥F for all k. The “more-over” part follows directly from Theorems 6.28 and 6.36 and Corollary 6.35. It is instructive to compare this result with prior work. To minimize Kempf–Ness functions fv,Bürgisser et al. [BFG +19] proposed and analyzed the gradient descent algorithm (7.2) but with step size η = 1/ L, where L is any upper bound on the smoothness parameter of fv. They further showed that the Kempf–Ness functions are N(π)2-smooth, leading to the step size η = 1/ N(π)2.This can be improved to η = 4/ D(π)2 using our result on the optimal smoothness parameter (see Proposition 6.20 and Eq. (6.23)). Under either choice, their results show that the squared norm of the moment map μ(vk) converges to 0 at O(k−1) whenever 0 ∈ ∆(v), which is exactly when fv is bounded from below (such v are called semistable ). 40 For the same step sizes, Hirai and Sakabe [HS24] showed that ∥μ(vk)∥F converges to its infimum even if the infimum is positive, but did not provide a convergence rate. Our Theorem 7.1 proves a convergence rate of O(k−1) that applies in general, regardless of the value of the optimization problem, provided we choose the step size η = 2/ D(π)2 arising from the use of the dual-smoothness parameter. 

Remark 7.2. In the setting of Theorem 7.1, suppose that v is fixed by a self-adjoint Zariski-closed sub-group H ⊆ G, that is, h · v = v for every h ∈ H. Consider the centralizer CG (H) of H in G, defined by C G (H) := {g ∈ G | ghg −1 = h (∀h ∈ H)}. Luna’s criterion [Lun75, Cor. 2 and Rem. 1] states that v is G-semistable ⇐⇒ v is C G (H)-semistable ; (7.3) 

recall that semistability means that the orbit closure does not contain the zero vector (i.e., the Kempf–Ness function is bounded from below); equivalently, the minimum norm over the moment polytope is zero. For convenience, we assume that C G (H) is connected. 41 

Hadamard mirror descent gives an alternative algorithmic proof of this equivalence using conservation of symmetry (Proposition 6.17). To see the connection, we choose c k := 1 for all k ∈ N in Eq. (6.10) ,so v k = gk · v remains in the G-orbit at all times. Here, g k ∈ G denotes the corresponding sequence of group elements, defined as in Eq. (6.9) for our objective Φ(X) = ∥X∥2F/2 and step size η = 2/ D(π)2. We claim that the group elements in fact belong to C G (H). To see this, set L := H ∩ K. Since L is Zariski dense in H, we have C G (L) = CG (H). By Proposition 6.17 (c), we have u · vk = vk for every u ∈ L. Therefore, using the K-equivariance of the moment map, we have uμ(vk)u† = μ(u · vk) = μ(vk) (u ∈ L).

Thus, μ(vk) ∈ Lie (CG (H)) = {X ∈ Lie (G) | uXu † = X (u ∈ L)}, hence e − 1   

> D(π)2μ(vk)

∈ CG (H).Since g 0 = I and g k+1 = e−D(π)−2μ(vk ) gk, induction gives g k ∈ CG (H) for every k ∈ N. In view of       

> 40 Strictly speaking they proved an O(k−1)bound for the best squared norm within kiterates. Hirai and Sakabe proved subsequently that the gradient norms along gradient descent with step size 1/ Lare nonincreasing [HS24, Lem. 3.8 (2)]; this upgrades the best-iterate bound to the last iterate.
> 41 If the centralizer is not connected, replace it by its identity component; this subgroup defines the same null cone.

57 Theorem 7.1, this already implies Luna’s equivalence (7.3) because norm minimization over the moment polytope is equivalent to minimizing the norm of the gradient of the Kempf–Ness function. To see this more explicitly, let μC denote the moment map for the restricted C G (H)-action on V. It is given by the composition of μ with the orthogonal projection onto Lie (CG (H)) ∩ Herm (n). Note that every w ∈ CG (H) · v is fixed by H, and hence also by L. The same equivariance argument therefore shows that μ(w) ∈ Lie (CG (H)) ∩ Herm (n), hence μC(w) = μ(w). Finally, by Theorem 7.1, we know that lim k→∞∥μ(gk · v)∥F = inf g∈G ∥μ(g · v)∥F, so 

inf 

> g∈G

∥μ(g · v)∥F = inf  

> g∈CG(H)

∥μ(g · v)∥F = inf  

> g∈CG(H)

∥μC (g · v)∥F.

The left-hand infimum vanishes exactly when v is G-semistable, while the right-hand side infimum vanishes exactly when v is C G (H)-semistable. Thus we obtain Luna’s criterion (7.3) , concluding the proof. 

7.2 Quantum functionals and entropic tensor scaling 

In this subsection, we derive an algorithm that computes the quantum functionals , an important class of tensor parameters [CVZ23]. The setting is the tensor action in Section 6.4: the group G =

GL (n1) × · · · × GL (nd) acts on V = Ten (n0; n1, . . . , nd) as in Eq. (6.28). Recall that the associated moment map computes the one-body quantum marginals (Eq. (6.29)) 

μ : Ten (n0; n1, . . . , nd) \ { 0} → PSD (n1) × · · · × PSD (nd), μ(T) = T(1) T(1)†

∥T∥2 , . . . , T(d) T(d)†

∥T∥2

!

,and the moment polytope is known as the entanglement polytope [WDGC13] and is given by Eq. (6.32): 

∆(T) = 

 

spec S(1)S(1)†

∥S∥2 , . . . , spec S(d)S(d)†

∥S∥2



S = ( I ⊗ g1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ gd)T, gℓ ∈ GL (nℓ)



.Note that each quantum marginal S(ℓ) S(ℓ)† 

> ∥S∥2

is positive semidefinite and has trace one; thus the eigen-values form a probability distribution and we can consider the entropy. The logarithmic quantum functionals are defined by maximizing a weighted sum of the marginal entropies over the entan-glement polytope. To define them formally, fix a probability distribution θ on [d] and consider the convex objective 

ϕθ : Rn1 × · · · × Rnd → R, ϕθ (p1, . . . , pd) :=

(

− ∑ℓ∈[d] θℓ H(pℓ) if all pℓ ≥ 0,

∞ otherwise, (7.4) where H(p) := − ∑i pi log pi is the Shannon entropy, with the usual convention that 0 log 0 : = 0. It is easily checked that ϕθ satisfies ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3). We denote by Φθ := ϕθ ◦ spec its unitarily invariant extension, obtained by replacing the Shannon entropy by the von Neumann entropy, H(X) :=

− tr [X log X]; see Example 3.8 (a). The quantum functionals are defined as follows. 42                                   

> 42 The quantum functionals were originally proposed for a single tensor (i.e., n0=1), but the definition gener-alizes naturally to tensor tuples ( n0≥2). From the perspective of quantum information, this means that we al-low Tto describe a mixed quantum state of dparticles rather than restricting to pure states. However, identifying Ten (n0;n1, . . . , nd)∼=Ten (1; n0,n1, . . . , nd), one can show that the quantum functionals of a d-tensor tuple Tcoincide with the quantum functionals of Tregarded as a tensor in Ten (1; n0,n1, . . . , nd)if we extend θby θ0:=0. Hence, the generalization we consider, while natural, does not introduce an essentially new concept.

58 Definition 7.3 (Quantum functionals, [CVZ23]) . For a probability distribution θ on [d], the logarith-mic quantum functional Eθ is, for all tensor tuples T ∈ Ten (n0; n1, . . . , nd) \ { 0}, given by Eθ (T) := max 

> p∈∆(T)
> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

θℓ H(pℓ) = − min  

> p∈∆(T)

ϕθ (p).

Its exponential is called the quantum functional Fθ (T) := eEθ (T); we also set F θ (0) := 0 for the zero tensor. 

When T is a single matrix ( d = 2, n0 = 1), the quantum functional coincides with the matrix rank for all θ. We discuss the motivation for the general definition in Section 1; see also Theorem 7.8 below and the discussion surrounding it. We will now apply our general results in Section 6.4 to the minimization above. We may assume that the tensor tuple T is concise : this means that each component of the moment map μ(T)

is a nonsingular and hence positive definite matrix. 43 In this case, g · T is also concise for all g ∈ G;hence the assumption spec μ(g · T) ∈ int dom ϕθ is satisfied for all g ∈ G. Thus we can apply Hadamard mirror descent. Taking ck+1 := eη/2 in Eq. (6.34) and using the formula −∇ H(X) = 

log X + I for the gradient of the von Neumann entropy, we obtain the following iteration: 

Tk+1 := I ⊗

> d

O

> ℓ=1

ρ−ηθ ℓ /2 

> ℓ

!

Tk, where (ρ1, . . . , ρd) = μ(Tk), T0 := T. (7.5) For η = 1, we refer to this algorithm as entropic tensor scaling .We now show that we can always take this step size. One immediate challenge is that the entropy is not smooth, and hence we cannot apply Corollary 6.22. Furthermore, numerical exper-iments suggest that 1-relative smoothness does not hold either, which would suffice for η = 1. Accordingly we establish the step-size condition (6.17) directly. To this end, we first observe that the step-size condition in the present setting amounts to a quantum entropy inequality. 

Lemma 7.4. To establish the step-size condition (6.17) for the sequence (7.5) , it suffices to prove that for all 

ρ ∈ PSD (Cn1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ Cnd ) of trace one such that the ρℓ are all invertible, 

η

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

θℓ H

 σℓ

tr σ



≥ log tr σ where σ :=



⊗d

> ℓ=1

ρ−ηθ ℓ /2 

> ℓ



ρ



⊗d

> ℓ=1

ρ−ηθ ℓ /2 

> ℓ



. (7.6) 

Here, ρℓ := tr ˇℓ ρ and σℓ := tr ˇℓ σ denote the partial traces as defined in Eq. (6.31) . Furthermore, in order to establish Eq. (7.6) for all η ∈ (0, 1 ], all d, all dimensions n 1, . . . , nd and all probability distributions θ, it suffices to establish it in the case η = 1, in which case Eq. (7.6) is equivalent to ∑d 

> ℓ=1

θℓ H(σℓ) ≥ 0.44 

Proof. The left-hand side of the step-size condition (6.17) simplifies to 

−

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

θℓ H(μ(Tk)ℓ) + 

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

θℓ H(μ(Tk+1)ℓ) + 

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

θℓ tr [μ(Tk)ℓ∇H(μ(Tk)ℓ)] = 

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

θℓ H(μ(Tk+1)ℓ)

!

− 1,          

> 43 If Tis not concise, its slices in some direction are linearly dependent. By an invertible transformation in the corre-sponding tensor factor, we may arrange that the nonzero slices are linearly independent. Deleting the zero slices then allows us to view Tin a smaller tensor subspace. One obtains a concise tensor T′by repeating this procedure for ev-ery rank-deficient tensor factor. It is not hard to see that the entanglement polytopes ∆

(T) and ∆(T′) coincide (up to padding by zeros), and hence the quantum functionals for the two tensors coincide. For tensors with Gaussian integer entries, this reduction can be carried out in polynomial time, and the resulting tensor can be arranged to have Gaussian integer entries with bit-lengths polynomially bounded in the input length.    

> 44 We emphasize that this inequality is nontrivial: while the σℓare always PSD, their traces will, in general, not be equal to one, so we can have H

(σℓ) < 0 for some ℓ. We remark that tr σℓ = tr σ ≥ 1, because N   

> ℓ∈[d]ρ−θℓ/2
> ℓhas all eigenvalues at least 1 and multiplying it from left and right does not decrease the trace of a positive semidefinite matrix.

59 where we used −∇ H(X) = log X + I and tr μ(Tk)ℓ = 1 for all ℓ ∈ [d]. The right-hand side is given by 1

η log ∥Tk+1∥2

|ck+1|2∥Tk∥2 = 1

η log ∥Tk+1∥2

∥Tk∥2 − 1, where we used our choice ck+1 := eη/2 leading to Eq. (7.5). Thus, the step-size condition is equiv-alent to 

η

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

θℓ H(μ(Tk+1)ℓ) ≥ log ∥Tk+1∥2

∥Tk∥2 . (7.7) Because both the left-hand side and the right-hand side are invariant under rescaling Tk, we may assume without loss of generality that ∥Tk∥ = 1. Then Eq. (7.7) becomes Eq. (7.6) if we set ρ :=

∑i∈[n0] tk,it† 

> k,i

and σ := ∑i∈[n0] tk+1, it†

> k+1, i

, where Tk = ( tk,i)i∈[n0], and use Eq. (6.30). For the last claim, suppose that η < 1. Then we can add a one-dimensional tensor factor (nd+1 = 1), use the weights ˜ θℓ := ηθ ℓ for ℓ ∈ [d] and ˜ θd+1 := 1 − η, and consider ˜ ρ := ρ ⊗ e1e†1. Then ˜σ = σ ⊗ e1e†1, and one can verify that the η = 1 result for these data is equivalent to Eq. (7.6). We now establish this entropy inequality. To this end, we will use a key notion from quantum information theory [Wat18]: quantum relative entropy , which is defined as 45 

D(A∥B) :=

(

tr [A log A] − tr [A log B] if A, B ⪰ 0 and im A ⊆ im B,

∞ otherwise. It satisfies the following monotonicity property, called the data-processing inequality [Wat18, Thm. 5.35]: 

D(A∥B) ≥ D(Λ(A)∥Λ(B)) (A, B ⪰ 0), (7.8) for any completely positive trace-preserving map Λ, such as the partial trace defined in Eq. (6.31). 

Theorem 7.5. Equation (7.6) holds for all η ∈ (0, 1 ]. As a consequence, the step-size condition (6.17) 

holds for all η ∈ (0, 1 ].Proof. By Lemma 7.4, to establish the theorem it suffices to prove ∑d 

> ℓ=1

θℓ H(σℓ) ≥ 0 for all σ as defined in Eq. (7.6) for η = 1. We will prove that 

H(σℓ) ≥ ∑ 

> k̸=ℓ

θk tr [σk log ρk] − (1 − θℓ) tr [σℓ log ρℓ] (ℓ ∈ [d]) , (7.9) which implies Eq. (7.6) by multiplying the ℓ-th inequality by θℓ, summing over ℓ, and using 

∑d 

> ℓ=1

θℓ = 1. By symmetry, it suffices to prove Eq. (7.9) for ℓ = 1, which will simplify the no-tation. To this end, define 

ω := ( ρ−θ1/2 1 ⊗ I⊗(d−1))ρ(ρ−θ1/2 1 ⊗ I⊗(d−1)) = ( I ⊗ Z)σ(I ⊗ Z), (7.10)            

> 45 We briefly comment on this definition, since the operator logarithm is only well-defined for positive definite oper-ators. Restricting Ato its image yields a positive definite operator, so log Ais well-defined; the trace of Alog Ais un-derstood to be taken on im A, as in the definition of the von Neumann entropy. Similarly, the assumption im A

⊆ im B        

> allows us to restrict to the image of B, where Bis positive definite, and to take the trace of Alog Bon this subspace. This is analogous to the definition of the KL divergence by the formula DKL

(p∥q) := ∑j pj log (pj/qj).

60 where we have introduced the positive definite operator Z := ⊗d

> ℓ=2

ρθℓ /2  

> ℓ

. Let Z = ∑λ λPλ de-note the spectral decomposition (i.e., λ ranges over the eigenvalues of Z and each Pλ denotes the orthogonal projection onto the corresponding eigenspace; note that ∑λ Pλ = I). Define ˜σ := ∑

> λ

(I ⊗ Pλ)σ(I ⊗ Pλ), ˜ω := ∑

> λ

(I ⊗ Pλ)ω(I ⊗ Pλ) = ( I ⊗ Z) ˜σ(I ⊗ Z),where we used the second formula in Eq. (7.10) and that Z commutes with its eigenprojections Pλ.Note that ˜ σ and ˜ ω have block-diagonal forms with respect to the eigenspaces of I ⊗ Z, and hence 

I ⊗ Z commutes with ˜ σ and ˜ ω; therefore, log ˜ ω = log ˜ σ + I ⊗ log (Z2) on the images of ˜ ω and ˜ σ

(which coincide). Thus: 

D( ˜σ∥ ˜ω) = − tr  ˜σ(I ⊗ log (Z2))  = − tr σ(I ⊗ log (Z2))  = −

> d

# ∑

> k=2

θk tr [σk log ρk], (7.11) where the second equality follows by inserting the definition of ˜ σ, commuting Pλ through log Z,and using the fact that ∑λ P2 

> λ

= ∑λ Pλ = I because the Pλ are a complete set of projections; the last equality holds by log (Z2) = ∑dk=2 θk I⊗(k−2) ⊗ log ρk ⊗ I⊗(d−k) and the property tr [σ(I⊗(k−1) ⊗ X ⊗

I⊗(d−k))] = tr [σk X] of the partial trace σk = tr ˇk σ. On the other hand, using the cyclicity property of the partial trace and again that ∑λ P2 

> λ

= I, we see that 

( ˜σ)1 = tr ˇ1

"

# ∑

> λ

(I ⊗ Pλ)σ(I ⊗ Pλ)

#

= tr ˇ1

"

σ I ⊗ ∑

> λ

P2

> λ

!# 

= tr ˇ1 σ = σ1,

( ˜ω)1 = ω1 = ρ−θ1/2 1 ρ1ρ−θ1/2 1 = ρ1−θ1 

> 1

,where the first equality on the second line is derived just like the first line, and the second equality follows from the first formula in Eq. (7.10). Therefore: 

D(( ˜σ)1∥( ˜ω)1) = tr [σ1 log σ1] − tr [σ1 log ρ1−θ1 

> 1

] = −H(σ1) − (1 − θ1) tr [σ1 log ρ1]. (7.12) Thus, Eq. (7.9) (for ℓ = 1) follows from Eqs. (7.11) and (7.12) and the data-processing inequal-ity (7.8) applied to ˜ σ, ˜ ω, and the partial trace tr ˇ1.Thus we obtain an O(k−1) convergence rate for entropic tensor scaling towards the logarithmic quantum functional as a consequence of our general results (Theorems 6.27 and 6.28). 

Theorem 7.6 (Convergence of entropic tensor scaling) . Let θ be a probability distribution on [d], let T ∈ Ten (n0; n1, . . . , nd) \ { 0} be a concise tensor tuple, and let (Tk)k∈N be the sequence generated by entropic tensor scaling (7.5) with step size η = 1. Then, for every k ≥ 1,

0 ≤ Eθ (T) − ∑

> ℓ∈[d]

θℓ H(( ρk)ℓ) ≤ 2 log ∥T∥ − log Cap p⋆ (T)

k ,

where (( ρk)1, . . . , (ρk)d) := μ(Tk) are the one-body quantum marginals of T k, and p ⋆ is any minimizer of ϕθ in ∆(T). In particular, if T has Gaussian integer entries, then the right-hand side is bounded by 

poly (d, nmax , ⟨T⟩)/k, where n max := max d 

> ℓ=1

nℓ and ⟨T⟩ denotes the bit-length of the tensor tuple. Proof. Recall that ϕθ satisfies ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3) and that the conciseness of T implies that spec μ(g · T) ∈

int dom ϕθ for all g ∈ G. Furthermore, the step-size condition is satisfied for η = 1 by Theorem 7.5. Hence, Theorem 6.27 applies with ϕ = ϕθ . Using the facts that ϕθ (spec μ(Tk)) = − ∑d 

> ℓ=1

θℓ H(( ρk)ℓ)

and min p∈∆(T) ϕθ (p) = −Eθ (T), the displayed convergence bound follows. The “in particular” part follows directly from Theorem 6.28. 61 Thus, for Gaussian integer tensors, we can approximate the logarithmic quantum functional up to additive error ε > 0 in a number of iterations that is linear in 1/ ε and polynomial in input size. The algorithmic result above also leads to a new succinct proof of the celebrated fact that the quantum functionals are universal spectral points [CVZ23]. In the literature, this notion is considered for single tensors, so we take n0 = 1 and denote Ten (n1, . . . , nd) := Ten (1; n1, . . . , nd).46 

Definition 7.7 (Universal spectral point) . Fix any d ≥ 2. Suppose that F : {d-tensors } → R≥0 is a function that assigns to any d-tensor (with arbitrary dimensions n 1, . . . , nd) a nonnegative number. Then F is called a spectral point for the semiring of complex d-tensors if the following hold: 

• Monotonicity: F(S) ≤ F(T) if S = ( A1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ Ad)T for some matrices A 1, . . . , Ad.

• Multiplicativity: F(S ⊗ T) = F(S)F(T), where S ⊗ T is regarded as a d-tensor. 

• Additivity: F(S ⊕ T) = F(S) + F(T), where S ⊕ T is regarded as a d-tensor. 

• Normalization: F(⟨r⟩) = r for the unit tensor ⟨r⟩ := ∑rj=1 e⊗dj .

This terminology is due to Strassen, who defined the asymptotic spectrum of the semiring of tensors (in fact, for general sub-semirings of d-tensors) and showed that the universal spectral points, i.e., the points in the asymptotic spectrum of the set of all d-tensors, characterize asymptotic transfor-mations of tensors [Str88]. Accordingly, the asymptotic spectrum has deep applications in alge-braic complexity and quantum information theory [Zui18]. For matrices, i.e., 2-tensors, the matrix rank is the only spectral point. For tensors of higher order, the ranks of their flattenings are trivial examples of universal spectral points. In a break-through work, Christandl, Vrana, and Zuiddam gave the first nontrivial family: they introduced the quantum functionals Fθ (as in Definition 7.3) and proved that they are universal spectral points for any fixed choice of θ [CVZ23]. Monotonicity, normalization, super-multiplicativity Fθ (S ⊗

T) ≥ Fθ (S)Fθ (T), and super-additivity Fθ (S ⊕ T) ≥ Fθ (S) + Fθ (T) are straightforward conse-quences of the definition and elementary properties of the entanglement polytope. In contrast, sub-multiplicativity Fθ (S ⊗ T) ≤ Fθ (S)Fθ (T) and sub-additivity Fθ (S ⊕ T) ≤ Fθ (S) + Fθ (T) require more substantial arguments. In [CVZ23], these two properties were proved via a representation-theoretic dual description of the entanglement polytope. Only recently have geometric proofs been found that avoid representation theory [Hir25, SDW26]. We now give a new algorithmic proof of the theorem by Christandl, Vrana, and Zuiddam that uses the convergence of entropic tensor scaling to obtain the multiplicativity and additivity of the quantum functionals. In contrast, the recent proof in [Hir25] relies on properties of the continuous-time flow to establish sub-additivity, but uses duality for sub-multiplicativity, whereas the proof in [SDW26] relies on a minimax formula based on that duality. 

Theorem 7.8 ([CVZ23]) . The quantum functional F θ (Definition 7.3) is a universal spectral point for any fixed θ.Proof. We first show multiplicativity. Let S ∈ Ten (m1, . . . , md) and T ∈ Ten (n1, . . . , nd) be two 

d-tensors; we may assume without loss of generality that both are nonzero and concise. 43 We can think of S ⊗ T ∈ Ten (m1n1, . . . , mdnd). Then the flattenings are given by (S ⊗ T)(ℓ) = S(ℓ) ⊗ T(ℓ)

(∀ℓ ∈ [d]) and the moment map is given by 

μ(S ⊗ T) = ( μ(S)1 ⊗ μ(T)1, . . . , μ(S)d ⊗ μ(T)d) .

> 46 But see Footnote 42, which provides a tensor-tuple interpretation of the results below.

62 Thus, we see inductively that the entropic tensor scaling sequences (7.5) started at S, T, and S ⊗ T,respectively, are related by 

(S ⊗ T)k = Sk ⊗ Tk (∀k ∈ N).Consequently, μ(( S ⊗ T)k)ℓ = μ(Sk)ℓ ⊗ μ(Tk)ℓ for all k ∈ N and ℓ ∈ [d], and 

Fθ (S ⊗ T) = lim  

> k→∞

e∑ℓ∈[d] θℓ H(μ(( S⊗T)k )ℓ ) = lim  

> k→∞

e∑ℓ∈[d] θℓ (H(μ(Sk )ℓ )+ H(μ(Tk )ℓ )) = Fθ (S)Fθ (T),where the first and last equalities hold because entropic tensor scaling computes the quantum functionals (Theorem 7.6) and the middle equality follows from the additivity of the von Neumann entropy: H(ρ ⊗ σ) = H(ρ) + H(σ).We next show sub-additivity. Regarding S ⊕ T as a tensor in Ten (m1 + n1, . . . , md + nd), the flattenings of S ⊕ T are given by (S ⊕ T)(ℓ) = S(ℓ) ⊕ T(ℓ) (∀ℓ ∈ [d]) up to the removal of zero columns. Since zero columns in the flattenings do not impact the marginals, we have 

μ(S ⊕ T) = ( λ μ (S)1 ⊕ (1 − λ) μ(T)1, . . . , λ μ (S)d ⊕ (1 − λ) μ(T)d),where λ := ∥S∥2/(∥S∥2 + ∥T∥2). Inductively, we see that the entropic tensor scaling sequences (7.5) started at S, T, and S ⊕ T, respectively, are related by 

(S ⊕ T)k ∝ pλk

Sk

∥Sk∥ ⊕ p1 − λk

Tk

∥Tk∥ (∀k ∈ N)

for some λk ∈ [0, 1 ]. Thus, μ(( S ⊕ T)k)ℓ = λkμ(Sk)ℓ ⊕ (1 − λk)μ(Tk)ℓ for all k ∈ N and ℓ ∈ [d], and 

Fθ (S ⊕ T) = lim  

> k→∞

e∑ℓ∈[d] θℓ H(μ(( S⊕T)k )ℓ )

= lim  

> k→∞

e∑ℓ∈[d] θℓ H(λk μ(Sk )ℓ ⊕ (1−λk )μ(Tk )ℓ )

= lim  

> k→∞

eλk ∑ℓ∈[d] θℓ H(μ(Sk )ℓ ) + ( 1−λk ) ∑ℓ∈[d] θℓ H(μ(Tk )ℓ ) + h(λk )

≤ lim 

> k→∞



e∑ℓ∈[d] θℓ H(μ(Sk )ℓ ) + e∑ℓ∈[d] θℓ H(μ(Tk )ℓ )

= Fθ (S) + Fθ (T),where the first and the last equalities hold again because entropic tensor scaling computes the quantum functionals (Theorem 7.6), the third equality follows from the standard recursion prop-erty of entropy, with h(λ) := −λ log λ − (1 − λ) log (1 − λ) denoting the binary entropy function, and the inequality holds because eλx+( 1−λ)y+h(λ) ≤ ex + ey for all x, y ∈ R and λ ∈ [0, 1 ] by Jensen’s inequality (e.g., [Str91, (2.13)]). This proves sub-additivity. As discussed above, the remaining properties of a spectral point are easily satisfied. We briefly recall their standard proof. Super-additivity follows readily from the observation that ∆(S ⊕ T)

contains all points of the form λp ⊕ (1 − λ)q (up to sorting nonincreasingly) for p ∈ ∆(S), q ∈ ∆(T)

and λ ∈ [0, 1 ]. Monotonicity holds because ∆(S) ⊆ ∆(T) for any S ∈ G · T, so in particular for 

S = ( A1 ⊗ · · · ⊗ Ad)T if A1, . . . , Ad are square matrices (and we can always reduce to this situation by padding with zeros). Finally, normalization holds because the marginals of the unit tensor are uniform ( ρℓ = I/r), and uniform distributions have maximum entropy (log r).

7.3 Symmetric quantum functional 

In this subsection, we give an algorithm for the symmetric quantum functional [CFTZ22]. The setting is the tensor power action in Section 6.5: the group G = GL (n) acts on tuples of d-tensors in 63 V = Ten (n0; n, . . . , n) as in Eq. (6.38). The moment map for this action (Eq. (6.39)) computes the sum of the d quantum marginals, hence the symmetric entanglement polytope (Eq. (6.40)) consists of vectors p ∈ Rn such that p/d is a probability distribution. The logarithmic symmetric quantum functional is then defined as the maximum entropy of the distributions thus obtained. 47 Recall the Shannon entropy, defined by H(p) := − ∑i pi log pi, with the usual convention that 0 log 0 : = 0. 

Definition 7.9 (Symmetric quantum functional, [CFTZ22]) . The logarithmic symmetric quantum functional ES is, for all tensors T ∈ Ten (n0; n, . . . , n) \ { 0}, given by ES(T) := max  

> p∈∆S(T)

H(p/d).

The symmetric quantum functional is defined as F S(T) := eES(T); we also set F S(0) := 0.

Hence, this falls into our minimization framework with the objective function ϕ(p) := −H(p/d);as usual we set H(p) := −∞ if p̸ ∈ Rn

> ≥0

. Instead of analyzing this problem from scratch, we can use Theorem 6.34 to relate the minimization of ϕ on the symmetric entanglement polytope to the minimization of the objective (6.46) 

ϕsum (p1, . . . , pd) := 1

d

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

ϕ(dp ℓ) = − 1

d

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

H(pℓ)

on the entanglement polytope ∆(Tshift ) of the shift stack tensor tuple Tshift from Definition 6.33. Note that this is precisely the objective function (7.4) for the logarithmic quantum functional with the uniform distribution θ = ( 1/ d, . . . , 1/ d). Consequently, the symmetric quantum functional of T can be computed as the quantum functional of Tshift with the uniform distribution. We may assume that the moment map image μS(T) is invertible and hence positive definite. 48 Since μS(T)

is the sum of the one-body quantum marginals, this is in general a weaker assumption than re-quiring that T is concise (in fact it is equivalent to requiring that Tshift is concise). If we describe the iterations in terms of tensors Tk ∈ Ten (n0; n, . . . , n) instead of their shifts (Tshift )k = ( Tk)shift , we obtain the following iteration for step size η = 1, which we call symmetric entropic tensor scaling :

Tk+1 :=



I ⊗ ρ−1/ (2d) 

> avg

⊗ · · · ⊗ ρ−1/ (2d)

> avg



Tk, where ρavg := μS(Tk)/d, T0 := T. (7.13) Note that ρavg = ( ρ1 + . . . + ρd)/d for (ρ1, . . . , ρd) := μ(Tk), hence the notation. Of course, Eq. (7.13) can also be obtained from Eq. (6.42) and the same step size η = 1. The above computes the logarithmic symmetric quantum functional with an O(k−1) conver-gence rate: 

Theorem 7.10 (Convergence of symmetric entropic tensor scaling) . Let 0̸ = T ∈ Ten (n0; n, . . . , n)

be a tuple of d-tensors such that μS(T) is nonsingular, and let (Tk)k∈N denote the sequence generated by symmetric entropic tensor scaling (7.13) . Then, for every k ≥ 1,

0 ≤ ES(T) − H(( ρk)avg ) ≤ 2 log ∥T∥ − log Cap p⋆ (T)

k ,

where (ρk)avg := μS(Tk)/d is the average one-body marginal of T k, p ⋆ is any minimizer of ϕ in ∆S(T), and the capacity refers to the tensor power action. Moreover, if T has Gaussian integer entries, then the objective gap is also bounded by poly (d, n, ⟨T⟩)/k, where ⟨T⟩ denotes the bit-length of the tensor tuple.                     

> 47 Like the ordinary quantum functionals, the symmetric quantum functionals were originally proposed for a single tensor ( n0=1), but the definition generalizes naturally to tensor tuples.
> 48 To see that this can be assumed without loss of generality, note that μS(T) = ∑d
> ℓ=1T(ℓ)T(ℓ)†/∥T∥2is singular if and only if their common kernel K:=Td
> ℓ=1ker T(ℓ)†is nontrivial. Analogously to Footnote 43 we can project Tonto (K⊥)⊗d
> to obtain a tensor T′of smaller format such that μS(T′)is invertible.

64 Proof. Recall that ϕ satisfies ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3) and that the assumption on T implies that spec μS(g · T) ∈

int dom ϕ for all g ∈ G. By Theorems 6.34 and 7.5, since ϕsum is the objective function for the quantum functional with θ = ( 1/ d, . . . , 1/ d), the step-size condition is satisfied for η = 1. Hence, the theorem follows from Corollary 6.35, using that ϕ(spec μS(Tk)) = −H(( ρk)avg ) and min p∈∆S(T) ϕ(p) = −ES(T).We remark that one can also obtain a convergence result as a direct consequence of Theorem 7.6 (involving the capacity of Tshift and an additional term log d in the numerator). 

7.4 G-stable rank via smoothing 

Next, we turn to the computation of the G-stable rank , a tensor invariant introduced by Derk-sen [Der22]. As in Section 7.2, the setting of this subsection is the tensor action in Section 6.4: the group G = GL (n1) × · · · × GL (nd) acts on V = Ten (n0; n1, . . . , nd) as in Eq. (6.28). This G-stable rank is defined for tensors over arbitrary perfect fields, but for complex tensors it can also be expressed in terms of the entanglement polytope [Der22, Thm 5.2], as follows. 49 

Definition 7.11 (G-stable rank, [Der22]) . For a parameter α ∈ Rd

> >0

, the G-stable rank rk G 

> α

is, for all T ∈ Ten (n0; n1, . . . , nd) \ { 0}, defined as 

rk G 

> α

(T) := sup 

> g∈G

min 

> ℓ∈[d]

αℓ∥g · T∥2

∥(g · T)(ℓ)∥2op 

= sup 

> g∈G

min 

> ℓ∈[d]

αℓ

∥μ(g · T)ℓ∥op 

= max  

> p∈∆(T)

min 

> ℓ∈[d]

αℓ

∥pℓ∥∞

,

where ∥(g · T)(ℓ)∥op is the operator norm of the ℓ-th flattening of the tensor g · T. 

The first equality follows immediately from the moment map for the tensor action (Eq. (6.29)). Accordingly, the inverse of the G-stable rank can be written as a convex minimization over the entanglement polytope ∆(T) (Eq. (6.32)): 1rk G 

> α

(T) = min  

> p∈∆(T)

max 

> ℓ∈[d]

∥pℓ∥∞

αℓ

= min  

> p∈∆(T)

ϕ(p), (7.14) for the convex objective 

ϕ : Rn1 × · · · × Rnd → R, ϕ(p1, . . . , pd) := max  

> ℓ∈[d]

max  

> i∈[nℓ]

pℓ,i

αℓ

.However, ϕ is not differentiable. In order to treat this problem in our framework, we utilize the 

smoothing technique in [Nes06, §4]. Concretely, we approximate ϕ with the following objective of log-sum-exp type, parametrized by a smoothing parameter δ > 0: 

ϕδ : Rn1 × · · · × Rnd → R, ϕδ(p) := δ log ∑ 

> ℓ∈[d],i∈[nℓ]

epℓ,i /(δα ℓ ).The function ϕδ is convex, symmetric in each component, and L-smooth, where L := 1/ (δα 2min ),with αmin := min ℓ∈[d] αℓ [BLNW20, Lem 3.10]. Moreover, it gives a controlled additive approxima-tion to ϕ [Nes06, (17)]: 

ϕ(p) ≤ ϕδ(p) ≤ ϕ(p) + δ log nsum (nsum :=

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

nℓ). (7.15)     

> 49 The G-stable rank was originally introduced for a single tensor (i.e., n0=1), but the definition generalizes naturally to tensor tuples.

65 Hence, by minimizing ϕδ for sufficiently small δ, the inverse of the G-stable rank can be approxi-mately computed with an arbitrarily small additive error. We now derive the Hadamard mirror descent iteration for this objective function. First, the unitarily invariant extension of ϕδ to tuples of Hermitian matrices is given by (see Example 3.8 (b)) 

Φδ : Herm (n1) × · · · × Herm (nd) → R, Φδ(X) := ϕδ(spec X) = δ log 

> d

# ∑

> ℓ=1

tr eXℓ /(δα ℓ ),with the following gradient: 

∇ℓΦδ(X) = 1

αℓ

eXℓ /(δα ℓ )

∑d  

> ℓ′=1

tr eXℓ′ /(δα ℓ′ ) .By substituting this into Eq. (6.34), and taking the step size η = 1/ (dL ) = δα 2min /d, we obtain the following iteration: 

Tk+1 := I ⊗

> d

O

> ℓ=1

exp − δα 2min 

2dαℓ

eρℓ /(δα ℓ )

∑d  

> ℓ′=1

tr eρℓ′ /(δα ℓ′ )

!! 

Tk, where (ρ1, . . . , ρd) = μ(Tk). (7.16) By our general convergence results (Theorems 6.27 and 6.28), this computes the inverse of the 

G-stable rank approximately: 

Theorem 7.12 (Approximation algorithm for inverse G-stable rank) . Let α ∈ Rd

> >0

, and let T ∈

Ten (n0; n1, . . . , nd) \ { 0} be a tensor tuple. Fix δ > 0, and let (Tk)k∈N be the sequence generated by the iteration (7.16) starting from T 0 := T. Then, for every k ≥ 1,

0 ≤ ϕδ(spec μ(Tk)) − 1rk G 

> α

(T) ≤ δ log nsum + 2d



log ∥T∥ − log Cap p⋆ (T)



δα 2min k ,

where p ⋆ is any minimizer of ϕδ in ∆(T). Thus, to compute the inverse G-stable rank with additive er-ror ε > 0, we may choose 50 δ := ε/(2 log nsum ) and k ≥ 8d log nsum (log ∥T∥ − log Cap p⋆ (T)) /(αmin ε)2

iterations. In particular, if T has Gaussian integer entries, then k = poly (nsum , ⟨T⟩)/(αmin ε)2 iterations suffice, where ⟨T⟩ denotes the bit-length of the tensor tuple T. Proof. Since ϕδ is 1/ (δα 2min )-smooth convex and symmetric in each argument, ϕδ satisfies ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3) and it holds that spec μ(g · T) ∈ int dom ϕδ for all g ∈ G. Hence, Theorem 6.27 applies with ϕ = ϕδ

and the step size η = δα 2min /d, and it gives 0 ≤ ϕδ(spec μ(Tk)) − min  

> p∈∆(T)

ϕδ(p) ≤ 2d



log ∥T∥ − log Cap p⋆ (T)



δα 2min k .By Eq. (7.15), we know that 0 ≤ min p∈∆(T) ϕδ(p) − 1/ rk G 

> α

(T) ≤ δ log nsum , and hence the dis-played convergence bound follows. For the subsequent claim, note that our choice of δ and k

leads to an additive error 

ϕδ(spec μ(Tk)) − 1rk G 

> α

(T) ≤ δ log nsum + 2d



log ∥T∥ − log Cap p⋆ (T)



δα 2min k ≤ ε

2 + ε

2 = ε.The claim for Gaussian integer tensors follows from the capacity lower bound of Theorem 6.28.                     

> 50 If nsum =1, then ϕδis independent of δand δ∈R>0can be chosen arbitrarily. In this case, we have
> ϕδ(spec μ(Tk)) = 1rk G
> α(T)for every k≥1.

66 7.5 Non-commutative rank by 1-norm minimization 

Finally, we revisit the problem of computing the non-commutative rank of a matrix tuple. Let A =(A1, . . . , An0 ) ∈ (Cn×n)⊕n0 be a tuple of square matrices. The non-commutative rank of A, denoted by ncrk (A), is given by the rank of the following linear symbolic matrix (see, e.g., [FR04]) 

A(x) := ∑

> i∈[n0]

xi Ai,in non-commuting indeterminates (xi)i∈[n0] (that is, xi xj̸ = xj xi for i̸ = j), defined formally over the 

free skew field [Coh95]. See also [GGOW20, Thm. 1.17] and [FSG23, Def. 2.1] for several equivalent definitions and motivations for this fundamental notion. Celebrated results state that the non-commutative rank is computable in deterministic polynomial time (e.g., when the matrix entries are rational numbers encoded in binary) [GGOW20, IQS18, HH21]. In this section, we derive a new algorithm for computing the non-commutative rank. It is based on Hadamard mirror descent and a recent formula by Hirai. Before stating our results, we introduce some identifications to connect with the literature. We shall think of Ten (n0; n, n) ∼=(Cn×n)⊕n0 as the space of n × n-matrix tuples A = ( A1, . . . , An0 ). Under this identification, the tensor action reads (g1, g2) · A := ( g1 A1 g⊤ 

> 2

, . . . , g1 An0 g⊤ 

> 2

) for g1, g2 ∈ GL (n); this is commonly called the left-right action . Then the two components of the moment map (6.29) take the form 

μLR (A)1 =

> n0

# ∑

> i=1

Ai A†

> i

∥A∥ 2 , μLR (A)2 =

> n0

# ∑

> i=1

A† 

> i

Ai

∥A∥ 2

!⊤

,where ∥A∥ 2 := ∑n0

> i=1

∥Ai∥2F. The transpose in the right-hand side formula does not impact the spectrum. Hence in the present setting, the entanglement polytope (6.32) can be written as 

∆LR (A) = 

(

spec 

> n0

# ∑

> i=1

Bi B†

> i

∥B∥ 2 , spec 

> n0

# ∑

> i=1

B† 

> i

Bi

∥B∥ 2

!

g1, g2 ∈ GL (n), Bi = g1 Ai g⊤ 

> 2

(∀i ∈ [n0]) 

)

.Without loss of generality, we assume that at least one of μLR (A)1 or μLR (A)2 is invertible; other-wise, we may represent A as a tuple of smaller square matrices. 51 This condition is equivalent to the following kernel condition :

\

> i∈[n0]

ker Ai = {0} or \

> i∈[n0]

ker A† 

> i

= {0}. (7.17) Under this hypothesis, Hirai [Hir26, Hir25] derived the following expression for the non-commutative rank as an ℓ1-norm minimization over the entanglement polytope. 

Proposition 7.13 ([Hir26, Thm. 1.4], [Hir25, Thm. 4.10]) . Suppose that A = ( A1, . . . , An0 ) ∈ (Cn×n)⊕n0

satisfies the kernel condition (7.17) . Then, its non-commutative rank is given by 

ncrk (A) = n − n

2 min 

> (p1,p2)∈∆LR (A)



p1 − 1n

n 1

+ p2 − 1n

n 1



.                          

> 51 For a matrix tuple A ∈ Ten (n0;n,n), let A′∈Ten (n′
> 0;n′
> 1,n′
> 2)be its concise reduction obtained by the method in Footnote 43. If n′
> 1>n′
> 2, by adding auxiliary zero slices to the last mode, we may make it a tuple of square matrices
> A′′ ∈Ten (n′
> 0;n′
> 1,n′
> 1)while keeping μLR (A′′ )1invertible. Both the concise reduction and the padding by zero slices preserve the non-commutative rank. The case n′
> 1<n′
> 2is handled symmetrically.

67 We note that his original characterization used the unnormalized moment map [Hir26, Thm. 1.4]. The above expression then follows under the kernel condition (7.17); see the discussion follow-ing [Hir25, Thm. 4.10]. Thus, the non-commutative rank is obtained by minimization over the entanglement polytope (Section 6.4) of the following convex objective: 

ϕ : Rn × Rn → R, ϕ(p1, p2) = p1 − 1n

n 1

+ p2 − 1n

n 1

.As in the previous subsection, ϕ is not differentiable, so we construct a smooth approximation. Observe that ϕ is the sum of |pℓ,iℓ − 1/ n| for all ℓ ∈ { 1, 2 } and iℓ ∈ [n]. We can approximate 

| · | ≈ p(·)2 + δ2, where δ > 0 controls the error. Thus we arrive at the following objective 

ϕδ : Rn × Rn → R, ϕδ(p1, p2) := ∑

> ℓ∈{ 1,2 }

# ∑

> i∈[n]

q pℓ,i − 1

> n

2 + δ2.Since p(·)2 + δ2 is convex and 1/ δ-smooth, ϕδ is also convex and 1/ δ-smooth, and it is clearly permutation-symmetric in both arguments. Moreover, from | · | ≤ p(·)2 + δ2 ≤ | · | + δ, it follows that ϕδ approximates ϕ up to additive error 2 nδ:

ϕ(p1, p2) ≤ ϕδ(p1, p2) ≤ ϕ(p1, p2) + 2nδ. (7.18) Hence, by minimizing ϕδ, the original minimization can be solved with an additive error O(nδ).We now derive the Hadamard mirror descent iteration for this objective. The unitarily invari-ant extension of ϕδ to pairs of Hermitian matrices is given by (see Example 3.8 (c)) 

Φδ : Herm (n) × Herm (n) → R, Φδ(X1, X2) := tr 

q X1 − In

2 + δ2 I + tr 

q X2 − In

2 + δ2 I,with the following gradient: 

∇Φδ(X1, X2) = 

 X1 − In

  X1 − In

2 + δ2 I

− 12

,  X2 − In

  X2 − In

2 + δ2 I

− 12



.By substituting this into Eq. (6.34) with the step size η = δ/2, we obtain the following iteration: 

Ak+1 :=

I ⊗ O

> ℓ∈{ 1,2 }

e− δ 

> 4

(ρℓ − In )

(ρℓ − In )2+δ2 I 

> −12

 Ak, (( ρ1, ρ2) = μLR (Ak)) ,or, concretely in terms of the components of the matrix tuples Ak = ( A(k) 

> 1

, . . . , A(k) 

> n0

):

A(k+1) 

> i

:= e− δ  

> 4σL

(σ2  

> L+δ2I

)− 12

A(k) 

> i

e− δ  

> 4σR

(σ2  

> R+δ2I

)− 12

, σL :=

> n0

# ∑   

> j=1
> A(k)
> jA(k)†
> j
> ∥A k∥2

− In , σR :=

> n0

# ∑   

> j=1
> A(k)†
> jA(k)
> j
> ∥A k∥2

− In .(7.19) By our general convergence results (Theorems 6.27 and 6.28), this allows computing the non-commutative rank approximately. Furthermore, since the non-commutative rank takes an integer value, the exact value can be computed by rounding. 68 Theorem 7.14 (Non-commutative rank computation) . Let A ∈ (Cn×n)⊕n0 ∼= Ten (n0; n, n) satisfy the kernel condition (7.17) . Fix δ > 0, and let (Ak)k∈N be the sequence generated by the iteration (7.19) 

starting from A0 := A. Then, for every k ≥ 1,

0 ≤ ncrk (A) −



n − n

2 ϕδ(spec μLR (Ak)) 



≤ n2δ + 2n



log ∥A∥ − log Cap p⋆ (A)



δk ,

where p ⋆ is any minimizer of ϕδ in ∆LR (A). Thus, to compute the non-commutative rank of the matrix tuple A, we may choose δ = 1/ (2n2) and k > 8n3(log ∥A∥ − log Cap p⋆ (A)) iterations; then we have 

ncrk (A) = n − ⌊ (n/2 )ϕδ(spec μLR (Ak)) ⌋ . (7.20) 

If A has Gaussian integer entries, then k = poly (n, ⟨A⟩ ) iterations suffice to compute the non-commutative rank exactly, where ⟨A⟩ denotes the bit-length. Proof. Since ϕδ is 1/ δ-smooth convex and symmetric in both arguments, ϕδ satisfies ( ϕ1)–( ϕ3) and it holds that spec μLR (( g1, g2) · A ) ∈ int dom ϕδ for all g1, g2 ∈ GL (n). Hence, Theorem 6.27 applies with ϕ = ϕδ and the step size η = δ/2, and it gives 0 ≤ ϕδ(spec μLR (Ak)) − min  

> p∈∆LR (A)

ϕδ(p) ≤ 4 log ∥A∥ − log Cap p⋆ (A)

δk .From Eq. (7.18), we see that 0 ≤ min p∈∆LR (A) ϕδ(p) − min p∈∆LR (A) ϕ(p) ≤ 2nδ; moreover we know that min p∈∆LR (A) ϕ(p) = 2 − (2/ n) ncrk (A) from Proposition 7.13. Thus we obtain the displayed convergence bound. For the rounding claim, note that our choice of δ and k leads to an additive error 0 ≤ ncrk (A) −



n − n

2 ϕδ(spec μLR (Ak)) 



≤ n2δ + 2n log ∥A∥ − log Cap p⋆ (A)

δk < 12 + 12 = 1; hence Eq. (7.20) follows because ncrk (A) is an integer. Lastly, the claim for Gaussian integer matrix tuples follows from the capacity lower bound of Theorem 6.28. While our algorithm has polynomial iteration complexity for Gaussian integer (or rational) inputs, it does not directly yield a polynomial-time algorithm in the Turing model due to its use of exact real arithmetic; see Remark 6.8. We plan to carry out a precision analysis to obtain such an algorithm in future work. We still find it interesting to compare the method with the existing algorithms for non-commutative rank computation [GGOW20, IQS18, HH21] (see also [FSG23]), as they are all based on different approaches. The algorithm in [GGOW20] solves the decision problem of whether ncrk (A) ≥ r by operator scaling on suitable matrix tuples constructed from A;then the non-commutative rank is obtained by a search over r. The other two algorithms [IQS18, HH21] compute the non-commutative rank more directly, but they involve more complex steps. In contrast, our algorithm iterates a single simple update formula and it targets the value of the non-commutative rank directly—combining these two desirable properties of prior work in one algorithm. Another way to compute the non-commutative rank is via the G-stable rank. Derksen [Der22, Prop. 2.9] showed that if one identifies the matrix tuple A ∈ Ten (n0; n, n) with a 3-tensor TA ∈

Ten (n0, n, n) := Ten (1; n0, n, n), the non-commutative rank equals the G-stable rank with α =(ℓ, 1, 1 ) for all ℓ ≥ n. By considering the limit ℓ → ∞, the corresponding minimization problem for the inverse of the G-stable rank (7.14) reduces to one that does not depend on the first mode. 69 For the resulting “ α = ( ∞, 1, 1 )” objective function, we can construct log-sum-exp approximations that do not depend on the first mode. Then, the corresponding Hadamard mirror descent update for the tensor TA serves as the one for the matrix tuple A ∈ Ten (n0; n, n) and α = ( 1, 1 ) (but with a smaller step size than the natural choice). Thus, rk G

> (1,1 )

(A) = ncrk (A), and the method in Theorem 7.12 can also be used for non-commutative rank computation. However, note that to compute rk G

> (1,1 )

(A) ∈ { 1, . . . , n}, we have to approximate the inverse 

G-stable rank 1/ rk G

> (1,1 )

(A) to additive error ε < 1 

> n−1

− 1 

> n

= Θ(n−2). To achieve this, Theo-rem 7.12 shows that k = O (n4 log n)( log ∥A∥ − log Cap p⋆ (A))  iterations suffice. In contrast, Theorem 7.14 shows that k = O n3(log ∥A∥ − log Cap p⋆ (A))  iterations suffice to compute the non-commutative rank exactly. The p⋆ are not necessarily the same (they are minimizers for dif-ferent objective functions), but we can upper bound both capacity terms by the common uniform estimate from Theorem 6.28. Then the resulting upper bounds on the iteration complexities can be compared: for the G-stable rank based method, we find an additional factor n log n compared to the method presented in this section. 

# Acknowledgments 

We thank Hiroshi Hirai for sharing an early version of his manuscript [Hir25] and for suggest-ing [Nes06]. We also thank Maxim van den Berg for valuable discussions and Frank Verstraete for asking about rigorous step sizes for inverse marginal iterations as in Eq. (1.24). We acknowledge support by the European Union (ERC Grant SYMOPTIC, 101040907), by the Deutsche Forschungs-gemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation, 556164098), by the Deutsche Forschungsge-meinschaft under Germany’s Excellence Strategy – EXC-2111 – 390814868, and by the German Federal Ministry of Research, Technology and Space (QuSol, 13N17173), and by the Klaus Tschira Foundation. We thank the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing at UC Berkeley and Q-FARM and the Leinweber Institute for Theoretical Physics at Stanford University for hospitality. 

# A Matrix scaling via marginal entropy maximization 

Let A = ( Aij ) ∈ Rn×m be an entrywise nonnegative matrix. The matrix scaling problem [Sin64, Ide16] asks to transform it into an approximately doubly-stochastic matrix 52 by scaling with posi-tive definite diagonal matrices: 

B1 ≈ 1

n , B⊤1 ≈ 1

m , where B = XAY , X, Y : diagonal, X, Y ≻ 0. (A.1) We may assume that each row and column of A has at least one positive entry, since otherwise this problem cannot be solved. In this appendix, we recast the matrix scaling problem as a marginal entropy maximization problem, and obtain an algorithm that we call entropic matrix scaling . Its iterations take the sim-ple form: 

Ak+1 ∝ diag (Ak1)− 12 Ak diag (A⊤ 

> k

1)− 12 , A0 := A. (A.2) This algorithm maximizes the sum of the marginal entropies at a rate inversely proportional to the iteration count. Because uniform distributions maximize the entropy, this solves problem (A.1) 

> 52 The term “doubly-stochastic” is usually used for square matrices, but we also use it for rectangular matrices under appropriate normalization as in the text: namely, that the row and the column sums are uniform distributions.

70 whenever possible, but the algorithm also applies to “non-scalable matrices” for which (A.1) can-not be achieved for arbitrarily small error. We note that the iteration (A.2) has previously been analyzed in [KRU14] (for scalable square matrices, and without the connection to mirror descent or entropy maximization). It can also be obtained as a special case of the SMART iteration, which has a mirror descent interpretation [REP24] (but on different variables from our mirror descent formalization below). The problem of maximizing the sum of marginal entropies can be formalized as follows in a simplified manner. 53 Let W := {(p, q) ∈ Rn × Rm | p ≥ 0, q ≥ 0, 1⊤ p = 1⊤q = 1} denote the set of pairs of probability distributions, and consider the following convex functions fA : Rn × Rm → R

and ϕ : Rn × Rm → R:

fA(x, y) := log ∑

> i,j

Aij exi +yj , ϕ(p, q) :=

(

− 12 (H(p) + H(q)) if (p, q) ∈ W,

+∞ otherwise, where H(p) := − ∑i pi log pi with 0 log 0 : = 0 denotes the Shannon entropy. 54 The components of the Euclidean gradient ∇ fA(x, y) are the row and column sums of the normalized rescaled matrix Bij := Aij exi +yj / ∑i′,j′ Ai′ j′ exi′ +yj′ ; hence ∇ fA(x, y) is an element of W. Hence, the problem of minimizing ϕ ◦ ∇ fA captures precisely the problem of maximizing the sum of the marginal entropies over all scalings of the matrix A.Hadamard mirror descent (5.1) for minimizing ϕ ◦ ∇ fA, which—as explained in Section 5.1— coincides with ordinary mirror descent (5.3) for h = f ∗ 

> A

and ϕ in gradient coordinates, is given by 

(xk+1)i := ( xk)i − η

2 log 

> m

# ∑

> j=1

(Bk)ij 

!

+ ck, (yk+1)j := ( yk)j − η

2 log 

> n

# ∑

> i=1

(Bk)ij 

!

+ c′

> k

, (A.3) where (Bk)ij := Aij e(xk )i +( yk )j / ∑i′,j′ Ai′ j′ e(xk )i′ +( yk )j′ , and ck and c′ 

> k

are any constants originating from the indeterminacy of ∇ϕ in the directions normal to the affine hull of W ⊆ Rn × Rm.These constants do not change the matrices Bk, which are normalized, nor the objective val-ues ϕ(∇ fA(xk, yk)) . We take x0 := 0 and y0 := 0 as the starting point. We determine the relative smoothness parameter L in this setting by an analysis similar to [REP24]. We use the characterization in Eq. (5.5), which is a precise special case of the Riemannian definition in Eq. (5.10) and in the present setting reads as follows: 

Dϕ(∇ fA(x′, y′)∥∇ fA(x, y)) ≤ L · D fA (x, y∥x′, y′) (x, x′ ∈ Rn, y, y′ ∈ Rm). (A.4) 

Lemma A.1. Relative smoothness holds with L = 1. Moreover, this cannot be improved for all matrices A (if n , m ≥ 2). Proof. For any x, y, we define Bij := Aij exi +yj / ∑i′,j′ Ai′ j′ exi′ +yj′ and denote by p := B1 and q :=

B⊤1 the row and column sums, respectively. We similarly define B′, p′ and q′ for x′, y′. Then,     

> 53 Strictly speaking, the rigorous way to formalize this problem is to restrict fAto a subspace

M := {(x, y) ∈ 

> Rn

× Rm | 1⊤ x = 1⊤y = 0} ∼= Rn−1 × Rm−1, and define ϕ(p′, q′) := − 12 (H(p′ + 1/n) + H(q′ + 1/m)) for (p′, q′) ∈ M ;as usual we define H(p) := −∞ for p̸ ∈ Rn      

> ≥0. This ensures that dom ϕhas a nonempty interior and the assumption in Definition 3.10 is satisfied. However, to avoid cumbersome notation, we proceed as if fAis defined on Rn

× Rm.    

> 54 The function fAcan be identified with the Kempf–Ness function for the action of G

= ( C×)n × (C×)m on V = Cn×m  

> by left-right-multiplication with diagonal matrices and the vector v

= ∑i,j A1/2    

> ij eie⊤
> j; see Eq. (6.4) and Example 3.9. We will not use this connection in the subsequent discussion.

71 ∇ fA(x, y) = ( p, q) and we can take ∇ϕ(p, q) = 12 (log p, log q) (recall that ∇ϕ is only determined up to irrelevant multiples of the all-ones vector in each component). By direct computation: 

Dϕ(( p′, q′)∥(p, q)) = 12

 DKL (p′∥p) + DKL (q′∥q) ,

DfA (( x, y)∥(x′, y′)) = DKL (B′∥B),where DKL is the KL-divergence (we regard B and B′ as probability distributions on [n] × [m]). As a consequence of the data processing inequality, which gives DKL (B′∥B) ≥ DKL (p′∥p) and 

DKL (B′∥B) ≥ DKL (q′∥q), we conclude that (A.4) holds with L = 1. To see that this cannot be improved for all matrices if n, m ≥ 2, consider B =

 t 00 (1−t)U



and 

B′ =

 t′ 00 (1−t′ )U



, where U := 1 

> (n−1)( m−1)

1n−11⊤ 

> m−1

is a normalized all-ones matrix and t, t′ ∈ (0, 1 )

with t̸ = t′. These clearly arise as scalings of the same matrix A. Then DKL (B′∥B) = DKL (p′∥p) = 

DKL (q′∥q) > 0 are all equal (to the binary KL-divergence between t and t′). Taking the step size η = 1/ L = 1 in Eq. (A.3), we see that the corresponding sequence of matrices 

Ak ∝ ediag xk A e diag yk (A.5) amounts precisely to the entropic matrix scaling algorithm (A.2). As a consequence of Theorem 5.5 and Proposition 5.9, we have the following convergence result: 

Theorem A.2 (Convergence of entropic matrix scaling) . Let A ∈ Rn×m be an entrywise nonnegative matrix such that each row and column has at least one positive entry. Let (Ak)k∈N be a matrix sequence generated by the entropic matrix scaling (A.2) , and let B k := Ak/ ∑i,j(Ak)ij . Then, for k ≥ 1,

ϕ



Bk1, B⊤ 

> k

1



− min     

> (p,q)∈∇ fA(Rn×Rm)

ϕ(p, q) ≤ log κA

k ,

where κA := ∑i,j Aij    

> min i,j:Aij >0Aij

is a natural condition number of the matrix A. Proof. One can observe that ϕ(Bk1, B⊤ 

> k

1) = ϕ(∇ fA(xk, yk)) from Eq. (A.5). From the general the-ory of log-sum-exp functions, we have f (p,q) 

> A

(0, 0 ) − inf x,y f (p,q) 

> A

(x, y) ≤ log κA for all (p, q) ∈∇ fA(Rn × Rm); see [BLNW20, Eq. (1.9)] and the discussion following it. This bounds the nu-merator in the right-hand side of Eq. (5.7). Thus, we obtain the upper bound from Theorem 5.5 and Proposition 5.9. We remark that entropic matrix scaling is a special case of entropic tensor scaling discussed in Section 7.2 applied to the matrix tuple (pAij ei ⊗ ej)i∈[n],j∈[m] and θ = ( 1/2, 1/2 ).

# B Technical proofs 

In this section, we prove Lemmas 2.2 and 3.4 and the second equivalence in Proposition 6.12. The first two results rely on the following lemma: 

Lemma B.1. Let M be a Hadamard manifold, and let γ(t) := exp x (tu ) and β(t) := exp y(tv ) ( u ∈

Tx M, v ∈ TyM) be asymptotic geodesic rays. Then, it holds that v = lim  

> t→∞

τγ(t)→y ◦ τx→γ(t)(u).72 Proof. The case of u = 0 is trivial; hence, we assume u̸ = 0. Since γ ∼ β, we have ∥v∥ = ∥u∥ =

∥τγ(t)→y ◦ τx→γ(t)(u)∥ for all t ∈ R≥0. Therefore, it suffices to show convergence of the angle: lim t→∞ ∠y(v, τγ(t)→y ◦ τx→γ(t)(u)) = 0. Let αt : [0, 1 ] → M be a geodesic such that αt(0) = y

and αt(1) = γ(t). Let θt := ∠γ(t)( ˙γ(t), ˙ αt(1)) and φt := ∠y(v, ˙ αt(0)) . The law of cosines on nonpositively-curved spaces [BH99, II.1.7 Proposition] (or the CAT (0) inequality) yields, cos θt ≥ d(x, γ(t)) 2 + d(y, γ(t)) 2 − d(x, y)2

2 d (x, γ(t)) d(y, γ(t)) = 12

 t∥u∥

d(y, γ(t)) + d(y, γ(t)) 

t∥u∥



− d(x, y)2

2t∥u∥ d(y, γ(t)) ≥ 1 − d(x, y)2

2t∥u∥(t∥u∥ − d(x, y)) −→  

> t→∞

1and cos φt ≥ d(y, β(t)) 2 + d(y, γ(t)) 2 − d(β(t), γ(t)) 2

2 d (y, β(t)) d(y, γ(t)) = 12

 t∥u∥

d(y, γ(t)) + d(y, γ(t)) 

t∥u∥



− d(β(t), γ(t)) 2

2t∥u∥ d(y, γ(t)) ≥ 1 − d(β(t), γ(t)) 2

2t∥u∥(t∥u∥ − d(x, y)) −→  

> t→∞

1, where the final inequalities hold for all sufficiently large t so that the denominators are positive; in the last limit we also used that d (β(t), γ(t)) < C for some C ∈ R. Then, 

∠y(v, τγ(t)→y ◦ τx→γ(t)(u)) ≤ ∠y(v, ˙ αt(0)) + ∠y( ˙αt(0), τγ(t)→y ◦ τx→γ(t)(u)) = φt + θt −→  

> t→∞

0, which completes the proof. Then we show Lemma 2.2. 

Proof of Lemma 2.2. We denote by γ(t) := g†etX g a geodesic on P. By the concrete formula of parallel transport, we have τγ(0)→I ˙γ(0) = ˆu† X ˆu, where ˆ u := g(g† g)−1/2 ∈ K. Define Y ∈ H such that t 7 → etY is asymptotic to γ. By Lemma B.1, Y is given by 

Y = lim  

> t→∞

τγ(t)→I ◦ τγ(0)→γ(t) ˙γ(0) = lim  

> t→∞

τγ(t)→I ◦ τγ(0)→γ(t) ◦ τI→γ(0)( ˆu† X ˆu).Since τγ(t)→I ◦ τγ(0)→γ(t) ◦ τI→γ(0) is an element of Hol I (P), this is given by the adjoint action of some ˜ ut ∈ K. Hence Y = lim t→∞ ˜u† 

> t

ˆu† X ˆu ˜ut. Since every conjugated matrix lies in the K-orbit of X,which is compact and hence closed, so does Y.We now prove the second equivalence in Proposition 6.12. The result itself is known (see, e.g., [FW20]), but we give a geometric proof that directly applies to arbitrary points X ∈ H.

Lemma B.2. In the setting of Section 6.2, let v ∈ V \ { 0} and X ∈ H. Then: 

∃g ∈ G, log cap X (g · v) > −∞ ⇐⇒ ∃ u ∈ K, log cap X (u · v) > −∞.

Proof. Only the forward direction needs proof. Let g ∈ G. By Lemma 2.2, there exists u ∈ K such that the geodesic ray γ(t) := g†etX g is asymptotic to t 7 → etu † Xu , i.e., both determine the same equivalence class. Then we have 

bX (x) = bγ(g† xg ) = bu† Xu (g† xg ) + cg (x ∈ P),73 where the former equality follows from the isometry x 7 → g† xg , and the latter from the fact that the Busemann functions of equivalent geodesics differ by a constant, which we call cg ∈ R. Hence, 

f Xg·v(x) = fg·v(x) + bX (x) = fv(g† xg ) + bu† Xu (g† xg ) + cg = f u† Xu v (g† xg ) + cg (x ∈ P).By dividing by two and taking the infimum over x ∈ P, we obtain log cap X (g · v) = log cap u† Xu (v) + cg 

> 2

= log cap X (u · v) + cg 

> 2

,where the second equality follows from Eq. (6.18). Thus, if the left-hand side is finite, then so is the right-hand side. Next, we show Lemma 3.4. 

Proof of Lemma 3.4. We denote γ(t) := exp x (tu ). We let R := Q ◦ ♭ : TM → R; then it is easy to see that R is parallel transport invariant, and that Rx is (Euclidean) l.s.c. convex. We have 

Ry(v) = Ry



lim  

> t→∞

τγ(t)→y ◦ τx→γ(t)(u)



≤ lim  

> t→∞

Ry



τγ(t)→y ◦ τx→γ(t)(u)



= Rx (u),where the first equality follows from Lemma B.1, the inequality follows from the lower semi-continuity of Ry, and the last equality follows since R is invariant under parallel transport. By symmetry, we also have Rx (u) ≤ Ry(v). Hence, we have Qx (♭u) = Qy(♭v).For ξ ∈ CM∞, the differential of the Busemann function at x ∈ M is given by Eq. (2.1): dbξ (x) = −♭u, where u ∈ Tx M is the unique tangent vector such that the geodesic t 7 → exp x (tu )

belongs to ξ. Therefore, if the differential at another point y ∈ M is given by d bξ (y) = −♭v (v ∈

TyM), then exp x (tu ) and exp y(tv ) are asymptotic. Thus, it holds that Qx (−dbξ (x)) = Qx(♭u) = 

Qy(♭v) = Qy(−dbξ (y)) , which implies that Q(ξ) := Qx (−dbξ (x)) is well-defined. 

# References 

[ABB04] F. Alvarez, J. Bolte, and O. Brahic, Hessian Riemannian gradient flows in convex pro-gramming , SIAM Journal on Control and Optimization 43 (2004), no. 2, 477–501. 8[AGM +10] A. Asadpour, M. X. Goemans, A. M ˛ adry, S. O. Gharan, and A. Saberi, An O(log n/log log n)-approximation algorithm for the asymmetric traveling salesman prob-lem , Proceedings of the Twenty-First Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, SODA ’10, Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2010, pp. 379–389. 2, 3 [AMN +23] A. Acuaviva, V. Makam, H. Nieuwboer, D. Pérez-García, F. Sittner, M. Walter, and F. Witteveen, The minimal canonical form of a tensor network , 2023 IEEE 64th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2023, pp. 328–362. 14 [ASU13] N. Alon, A. Shpilka, and C. Umans, On sunflowers and matrix multiplication , Com-putational Complexity 22 (2013), 219–243. 15 [Ati82] M. F. Atiyah, Convexity and commuting Hamiltonians , Bulletin of the London Mathe-matical Society 14 (1982), no. 1, 1–15. 3 74 [AZGL +18] Z. Allen-Zhu, A. Garg, Y. Li, R. Oliveira, and A. Wigderson, Operator scaling via geodesically convex optimization, invariant theory and polynomial identity testing , Pro-ceedings of the 50th Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2018, ACM, 2018, pp. 172–181. 3, 4 [BBT17] H. H. Bauschke, J. Bolte, and M. Teboulle, A descent lemma beyond Lipschitz gradient continuity: first-order methods revisited and applications , Mathematics of Operations Research 42 (2017), no. 2, 330–348. 3, 8, 29 [BCC +17] J. Blasiak, T. Church, H. Cohn, J. A. Grochow, E. Naslund, W. F. Sawin, and C. Umans, On cap sets and the group-theoretic approach to matrix multiplication , Dis-crete Analysis (2017). 15 [BCCT08] J. Bennett, A. Carbery, M. Christ, and T. Tao, The Brascamp–Lieb inequalities: finite-ness, structure and extremals , Geometric and Functional Analysis 17 (2008), no. 5, 1343–1415. 4 [BCS96] P. Bürgisser, M. Clausen, and M. A. Shokrollahi, Algebraic Complexity Theory ,Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften, Springer, 1996. 3 [BCV21] A. Botero, M. Christandl, and P. Vrana, Large deviation principle for moment map esti-mation , Electronic Journal of Probability 26 (2021), 1–23. 39 [Bec17] A. Beck, First-order methods in optimization , MOS-SIAM Series in Optimization, So-ciety for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, 2017. 28, 32 [BFG +18] P. Bürgisser, C. Franks, A. Garg, R. Oliveira, M. Walter, and A. Wigderson, Efficient algorithms for tensor scaling, quantum marginals, and moment polytopes , 59th IEEE An-nual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2018, pp. 883–897. 3, 4, 14, 39, 49, 50 [BFG +19] , Towards a theory of non-commutative optimization: geodesic 1st and 2nd order methods for moment maps and polytopes , 60th IEEE Annual Symposium on Founda-tions of Computer Science (FOCS), 2019, arXiv:1910.12375v3, pp. 845–861. 3, 4, 6, 10, 11, 19, 34, 39, 42, 43, 46, 47, 54, 55, 56, 57 [BGO +18] P. Bürgisser, A. Garg, R. Oliveira, M. Walter, and A. Wigderson, Alternating min-imization, scaling algorithms, and the null-cone problem from invariant theory , 9th In-novations in Theoretical Computer Science Conference (ITCS), Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2018, pp. 24:1–24:20. 3, 4 [BH99] M. R. Bridson and A. Haefliger, Metric spaces of non-positive curvature , Springer, 1999. MR 1744486 18, 73 [BH10a] A. Barvinok and J. A. Hartigan, Maximum entropy Edgeworth estimates of the number of integer points in polytopes , arXiv:0910.2497, 2010. 2 [BH10b] , Maximum entropy Gaussian approximations for the number of integer points and volumes of polytopes , Advances in Applied Mathematics 45 (2010), no. 2, 252–289. 2 [BH12] , An asymptotic formula for the number of non-negative integer matrices with pre-scribed row and column sums , Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 364 

(2012), no. 8, 4323–4368. 2 [BKVH07] S. Boyd, S. Kim, L. Vandenberghe, and A. Hassibi, A tutorial on geometric program-ming , Optimization and Engineering 8 (2007), no. 1, 67–127. 2 [BLNW20] P. Bürgisser, Y. Li, H. Nieuwboer, and M. Walter, Interior-point methods for uncon-strained geometric programming and scaling problems , arXiv:2008.12110, 2020. 43, 65, 72 75 [Bol02] B. Bollobás, Modern Graph Theory , 1 ed., Graduate Texts in Mathematics, Springer, 2002. 3 [BR24] A. Barvinok and M. Rudelson, A quick estimate for the volume of a polyhedron , Isr. J. Math. 262 (2024), no. 1, 449–473. 2 [Bri87] M. Brion, Sur l’image de l’application moment , Séminaire d’Algèbre Paul Dubreil et Marie-Paule Malliavin, Springer, 1987, pp. 177–192. 39 [BT03] A. Beck and M. Teboulle, Mirror descent and nonlinear projected subgradient methods for convex optimization , Operations Research Letters 31 (2003), no. 3, 167–175. 9 [CFTZ22] M. Christandl, O. Fawzi, H. Ta, and J. Zuiddam, Symmetric subrank of tensors and applications , arXiv:2104.01130, 2022. 14, 63, 64 [CGP20a] G. C. Calafiore, S. Gaubert, and C. Possieri, Log-sum-exp neural networks and posyno-mial models for convex and log-log-convex data , IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 31 (2020), no. 3, 827–838. 2 [CGP20b] , A universal approximation result for difference of log-sum-exp neural networks ,IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems 31 (2020), no. 12, 5603–5612. 2 [Coh95] P. M. Cohn, Skew Fields: Theory of General Division Rings , Cambridge University Press, 1995. 16, 67 [CVZ23] M. Christandl, P. Vrana, and J. Zuiddam, Universal points in the asymptotic spectrum of tensors , Journal of the American Mathematical Society 36 (2023), no. 1, 31–79. 3, 13, 14, 58, 59, 62 [Der22] H. Derksen, The G-stable rank for tensors and the cap set problem , Algebra & Number Theory 16 (2022), no. 5, 1071–1097. 15, 16, 65, 69 [DLR22] M. L. Do ˘ gan, J. Leake, and M. Ravichandran, Deterministic approximation algorithms for volumes of spectrahedra , arXiv:2211.12541, 2022. 2 [FR04] M. Fortin and C. Reutenauer, Commutative/noncommutative rank of linear matrices and subspaces of matrices of low rank , Séminaire Lotharingien de Combinatoire 52 (2004), B52f (eng). 67 [Fra18] C. Franks, Operator scaling with specified marginals , Proceedings of the 50th An-nual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC 2018, ACM, 2018, pp. 190–203. 3, 4 [FSG23] C. Franks, T. Soma, and M. X. Goemans, Shrunk subspaces via operator Sinkhorn iter-ation , Proceedings of the 2023 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algo-rithms (SODA), 2023, pp. 1655–1668. 16, 67, 69 [Ful00] W. Fulton, Eigenvalues, invariant factors, highest weights, and Schubert calculus , Bull. New Ser. Am. Math. Soc. 37 (2000), no. 3, 209–249. 4 [FW20] C. Franks and M. Walter, Minimal length in an orbit closure as a semiclassical limit ,arXiv:2004.14872, 2020. 3, 10, 38, 39, 73 [GGOW16] A. Garg, L. Gurvits, R. Oliveira, and A. Wigderson, A deterministic polynomial time algorithm for non-commutative rational identity testing , 2016 IEEE 57th Annual Sym-posium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2016, pp. 109–117. 3, 4 [GGOW18] , Algorithmic and optimization aspects of Brascamp–Lieb inequalities, via operator scaling , Geometric and Functional Analysis 28 (2018), no. 1, 100–145. 3, 4 76 [GGOW20] , Operator scaling: theory and applications , Foundations of Computational Mathematics 20 (2020), no. 2, 223–290. 16, 17, 67, 69 [GRS21] V. Georgoulas, J. W. Robbin, and D. A. Salamon, The moment-weight inequality and the Hilbert-Mumford criterion—GIT from the differential geometric viewpoint , Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 2297, Springer, 2021. 41 [GS82] V. Guillemin and S. Sternberg, Convexity properties of the moment mapping , Inven-tiones mathematicae 67 (1982), no. 3, 491–513. 3 [Gur04] L. Gurvits, Classical complexity and quantum entanglement , Journal of Computer and System Sciences 69 (2004), no. 3, 448–484. 39 [Gur06] , Hyperbolic polynomials approach to Van der Waerden/Schrijver–Valiant like con-jectures: sharper bounds, simpler proofs and algorithmic applications , Proceedings of the thirty-eighth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, 2006, pp. 417–426. 39 [GWS21] S. Gunasekar, B. Woodworth, and N. Srebro, Mirrorless mirror descent: A natural derivation of mirror descent , Proceedings of The 24th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (Arindam Banerjee and Kenji Fukumizu, eds.), Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 130, PMLR, April 2021, pp. 2305– 2313. 9 [GY98] L. Gurvits and P. N. Yianilos, The deflation-inflation method for certain semidefinite pro-gramming and maximum determinant completion problems , Tech. report, NEC, 1998. 39 [Hel78] S. Helgason, Differential geometry, Lie groups, and symmetric spaces , Academic Press, 1978. 9, 19 [HH21] M. Hamada and H. Hirai, Computing the nc-rank via discrete convex optimization on CAT(0) spaces , SIAM Journal on Applied Algebra and Geometry 5 (2021), no. 3, 455–478. 16, 17, 67, 69 [HI77] E. Heintze and H.-C. Im Hof, Geometry of horospheres , Journal of Differential Geom-etry 12 (1977), no. 4, 481–491. 19 [Hir24] H. Hirai, Convex analysis on Hadamard spaces and scaling problems , Found. Comput. Math. 24 (2024), no. 6, 1979–2016. 9, 19, 27 [Hir25] , Generalized gradient flows in Hadamard manifolds and convex optimization on entanglement polytopes , arXiv:2511.12064, 2025. 3, 4, 6, 7, 10, 14, 16, 20, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 35, 62, 67, 68, 70 [Hir26] , A scaling characterization of nc-rank via unbounded gradient flow , Linear Alge-bra and its Applications 730 (2026), 525–545. 3, 16, 67, 68 [HKA16] W. Hoburg, P. Kirschen, and P. Abbeel, Data fitting with geometric-programming-compatible softmax functions , Optimization and Engineering 17 (2016), no. 4, 897–918. 2[HNW23] H. Hirai, H. Nieuwboer, and M. Walter, Interior-point methods on manifolds: theory and applications , 2023 IEEE 64th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2023, pp. 2021–2030. 3, 4, 8, 9, 19 [Hor62] A. Horn, Eigenvalues of sums of Hermitian matrices. , Pacific Journal of Mathematics 

12 (1962), no. 1, 225–241. 4 77 [HS24] H. Hirai and K. Sakabe, Gradient descent for unbounded convex functions on Hadamard manifolds and its applications to scaling problems , 2024 IEEE 65th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), 2024, pp. 2387–2402. 3, 11, 34, 42, 43, 56, 57 [HUL01] J. B. Hiriart-Urruty and C. Lemaréchal, Fundamentals of Convex Analysis , Springer, 2001. 29 [Ide16] M. Idel, A review of matrix scaling and Sinkhorn’s normal form for matrices and positive maps , arXiv:1609.06349, 2016. 70 [IQS18] G. Ivanyos, Y. Qiao, and K. V. Subrahmanyam, Constructive non-commutative rank computation is in deterministic polynomial time , computational complexity 27 (2018), no. 4, 561–593. 16, 17, 67, 69 [Jay57a] E. T. Jaynes, Information theory and statistical mechanics I , Physical Review 106 (1957), no. 4, 620. 2 [Jay57b] , Information theory and statistical mechanics II , Physical Review 108 (1957), no. 2, 171. 2 [JST26] J. Jiang, L. Shi, and J. Tan, Mirror descent on Riemannian manifolds , Anal. Appl. (2026), no. S0219530526500521, 1–23. 9 [Kel60] J. E. Kelley, Jr, The cutting-plane method for solving convex programs , Journal of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics 8 (1960), no. 4, 703–712. 2 [Kem78] G. R. Kempf, Instability in invariant theory , Annals of Mathematics 108 (1978), no. 2, 299–316. 4, 34 [Kha79] L. G. Khachiyan, A polynomial algorithm in linear programming , Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR 244 (1979), 1093–1096 (Russian). 2 [Kha80] , Polynomial algorithms in linear programming , USSR Computational Mathe-matics and Mathematical Physics 20 (1980), no. 1, 53–72. 2 [Kir84] F. Kirwan, Convexity properties of the moment mapping. III , Inventiones mathematicae 

77 (1984), no. 3, 547–552. MR 759257 3, 4, 6, 9, 34 [Kly98] A. Klyachko, Stable bundles, representation theory and Hermitian operators , Sel. Math. New Ser. 4 (1998), no. 3, 419–445. 4 [Kly02] , Coherent states, entanglement, and geometric invariant theory , arXiv:quant-ph/0206012, 2002. 4 [Kly04] , Quantum marginal problem and representations of the symmetric group ,arXiv:quant-ph/0409113, 2004. 4 [Kly06] , Quantum marginal problem and N-representability , J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 36 

(2006), 72–86. 4 [KN79] G. R. Kempf and L. Ness, The length of vectors in representation spaces , Algebraic Geometry, Springer, 1979, pp. 233–243. 4, 5 [Kos73] B. Kostant, On convexity, the Weyl group and the Iwasawa decomposition , Annales sci-entifiques de l’École normale supérieure, vol. 6, 1973, pp. 413–455. 3 [KRU14] P. A. Knight, D. Ruiz, and B. Uçar, A symmetry preserving algorithm for matrix scaling ,SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and Applications 35 (2014), no. 3, 931–955. 71 [KSS18] R. Kleinberg, W. F. Sawin, and D. Speyer, The growth rate of tri-colored sum-free sets ,Discrete Analysis (2018). 15 78 [KT99] A. Knutson and T. Tao, The Honeycomb Model of GL n(C) Tensor Products I: Proof of the Saturation Conjecture , Journal of the American Mathematical Society 12 (1999), no. 4, 1055–1090. 4 [Lew96a] A. S. Lewis, Convex analysis on the Hermitian matrices , SIAM Journal on Optimization 

6 (1996), no. 1, 164–177. 23 [Lew96b] , Group invariance and convex matrix analysis , SIAM Journal on Matrix Analy-sis and Applications 17 (1996), no. 4, 927–949. 23 [Lew00] , Convex analysis on Cartan subspaces , Nonlinear Analysis: Theory, Methods & Applications 42 (2000), no. 5, 813–820. 23 [LFN18] H. Lu, R. M. Freund, and Y. Nesterov, Relatively smooth convex optimization by first-order methods, and applications , SIAM Journal on Optimization 28 (2018), no. 1, 333– 354. 3, 8, 29 [LSW98] N. Linial, A. Samorodnitsky, and A. Wigderson, A deterministic strongly polynomial algorithm for matrix scaling and approximate permanents , Proceedings of the thirtieth annual ACM symposium on Theory of Computing, 1998, pp. 644–652. 3 [Lun75] D. Luna, Adhérence d’orbite et invariants , Inventiones mathematicae 29 (1975), 231– 238. 11, 57 [Mos55] G. D. Mostow, Self-adjoint groups , Annals of Mathematics 62 (1955), no. 1, 44–55. 19 [Nes06] Y. Nesterov, Smoothing technique and its applications in semidefinite optimization , Math-ematical Programming 110 (2006), no. 2, 245–259. 16, 23, 65, 70 [NM84] L. Ness and D. Mumford, A stratification of the null cone via the moment map , Ameri-can Journal of Mathematics 106 (1984), no. 6, 1281–1329. 3, 4, 6, 9, 34, 39 [NY83] A. S. Nemirovsky and D. B. Yudin, Problem complexity and method efficiency in opti-mization , Wiley, 1983. 3, 7, 26 [Ren01] J. Renegar, A mathematical view of interior-point methods in convex optimization , Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2001. 2 [REP24] M. Raus, Y. Elshiaty, and S. Petra, Accelerated Bregmann divergence optimization with SMART: an information geometry point of view , Journal of Applied and Numerical Optimization 6 (2024), 1–40. 71 [RM15] G. Raskutti and S. Mukherjee, The information geometry of mirror descent , IEEE Trans-actions on Information Theory 61 (2015), no. 3, 1451–1457. 9 [Roc70] R. T. Rockafellar, Convex Analysis , Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1970. 35 [RW98] R. T. Rockafellar and R. J-B. Wets, Variational Analysis , Springer, 1998,. 53 [Sak96] T. Sakai, Riemannian Geometry , American Mathematical Society, 1996. 18, 20 [SDW26] K. Sakabe, M. L. Do ˘ gan, and M. Walter, Strassen’s support functionals coincide with the quantum functionals , arXiv:2601.21553, 2026. 14, 62 [Sin64] R. Sinkhorn, A relationship between arbitrary positive matrices and doubly stochastic ma-trices , Annals of Mathematical Statistics 35 (1964), no. 2, 876–879. 70 [Str86] V. Strassen, The asymptotic spectrum of tensors and the exponent of matrix multiplication ,27th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, 1986, pp. 49–54. 12 [Str88] , The asymptotic spectrum of tensors , Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik 1988 (1988), no. 384, 102–152. 12, 62 79 [Str91] , Degeneration and complexity of bilinear maps: Some asymptotic spectra , Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik 413 (1991), 127–180. 63 [Str05] , Komplexität und geometrie bilinearer Abbildungen , Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung (DMV) 107 (2005), 3–31. 12 [SV14] M. Singh and N. K. Vishnoi, Entropy, optimization and counting , Proceedings of the Forty-Sixth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’14, ACM, 2014, pp. 50–59. 2, 3 [SV19] D. Straszak and N. K. Vishnoi, Maximum entropy distributions: Bit complexity and sta-bility , Conference on Learning Theory, 25-28 June 2019, Phoenix, AZ, USA, PMLR, vol. 99, 2019, pp. 2861–2891. 2, 3 [Tam99] T.-Y. Tam, An extension of a result of Lewis , The Electronic Journal of Linear Algebra 

5 (1999), 1–10. 23 [Tao16] T. Tao, A symmetric formulation of the Croot–Lev–Pach–Ellenberg–Gijswijt capset bound ,https://terrytao.wordpress.com/2016/05/18/a-symmetric-formulation-of-the-croot-lev-pach-ellenberg-gijswijt-capset-bound/, 2016, Accessed: 2026-01-27. 15 [TS16] T. Tao and W. Sawin, Notes on the “slice rank” of tensors , https://terrytao.wordpress. com/2016/08/24/notes-on-the-slice-rank-of-tensors/, 2016, Accessed: 2026-01-27. 15 [vdBCL +25a] M. van den Berg, M. Christandl, V. Lysikov, H. Nieuwboer, M. Walter, and J. Zuid-dam, Computing moment polytopes – with a focus on tensors, entanglement and matrix multiplication , arXiv:2510.08336, 2025. 49, 50 [vdBCL +25b] , Computing moment polytopes of tensors, with applications in algebraic complex-ity and quantum information , Proceedings of the 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’25, ACM, 2025, pp. 756–765. 4 [VDDM03] F. Verstraete, J. Dehaene, and B. De Moor, Normal forms and entanglement measures for multipartite quantum states , Physical Review A 68 (2003), 012103. 14 [Wal17] N. R. Wallach, Geometric Invariant Theory , Springer, 2017. 19, 20 [Wat18] J. Watrous, The Theory of Quantum Information , Cambridge University Press, 2018. 44, 60 [WDGC13] M. Walter, B. Doran, D. Gross, and M. Christandl, Entanglement polytopes: Mul-tiparticle entanglement from single-particle information , Science 340 (2013), no. 6137, 1205–1208. 4, 6, 48, 58 [Zui18] J. Zuiddam, Algebraic complexity, asymptotic spectra and entanglement polytopes , Ph.D. thesis, University of Amsterdam, 2018. 3, 62 80