Title: Temporal-Causal Inference for Reinforcement Learning via Automata Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.07461v1

Published Time: Wed, 09 Sep 2026 03:14:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# Temporal-Causal Inference for Reinforcement Learning via Automata Learning 

Jan Corazza 1, Daniil Kaminskyi 1, Simon Lutz 1, Patrick Nossol 1, Hadi Partovi Aria 2, Zhe Xu 2, Daniel Neider 1

Abstract — We consider reinforcement learning in environ-ments with dynamics that undergo an irreversible phase transi-tion governed by a hidden temporal pattern. The agent observes the base state but cannot observe the phase directly. We formal-ize this problem as a two-phase non-Markovian decision process and introduce Temporal-Causal Inference for Reinforcement Learning (TCIRL), a framework that jointly learns a control policy and infers the hidden temporal cause of the phase transition. TCIRL maintains a hypothesis deterministic finite automaton (DFA) to track what phase is active and refines it via counterexample-driven SAT-based synthesis. We prove that the hypothesis converges almost surely to a DFA recognizing the true cause language on all attainable label sequences, yielding an optimal policy for the original non-Markovian decision process. Experiments on a genetic therapy gridworld and a traffic signal environment show that TCIRL recovers the correct cause DFA and matches the full-information baseline in both domains. 

I. INTRODUCTION Reinforcement learning (RL) methods for control typically assume Markovian, fully observable dynamics [1]. In many systems, however, the transition dynamics depend on hidden temporal structure that the agent cannot observe directly. Such history-dependent dynamics give rise to non-Markovian decision processes (NMDPs), where the effect of an action depends on more than the current state [2], [3]. Two visits to the same state may therefore require different decisions because the governing dynamics depend on the trajectory that led there. Standard Markovian RL aliases these situations together, so a memoryless policy over the observed state need not be optimal in general [4]. The goal is to recover a compact finite memory of the past that restores Markovian dynamics in an augmented state space. Our running example is a medical treatment scenario in which a patient’s symp-toms respond stochastically to treatment, but the treatment efficacy depends on whether a specific sequence of genetic 

> 1

Research Center Trustworthy Data Science and Security, TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, 44227, Germany. {jan.corazza, daniil.kaminskyi, simon.lutz, patrick.nossol, daniel.neider} @tu-dortmund.de 

> 2

School for Engineering of Matter, Transport, and Energy at Arizona State University, Tempe, Az 85281, USA. {hpartovi, xzhe1} @asu.edu 

Accepted for publication in the Proceedings of the 65th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), Honolulu, Hawaii, USA, December 2026. © 2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.        

> G1G2
> G4G3
> MD∈ { 0, . . . , 9}
> H∈ { 0, . . . , 9}

×

Fig. 1: Genetic therapy gridworld. The agent navigates a 5×5

grid with four gene sites G1 to G4 and a medicine cell M .Site G3 is a distractor and does not affect the cause. The state includes position, symptom level D, and harm level H.

0 20 40 60 80 100 02468 

> Phase 1 Phase 2 Remains in Phase 1

Time in Eval Episode Symptom Level 

> Cause unknown Cause inferred (ours)

Fig. 2: Symptom level during the final evaluation episode (af-ter training). The TCIRL agent triggers the phase transition around step 20, after which the symptoms decline. Standard Q-learning remains in Phase 1. (IQM with 95% CI, 50 seeds.) modifications has been performed, a condition that is not directly observable from symptoms alone. We study environments in which a hidden temporal cause governs the transition dynamics (Assumption 1). A hidden temporal logic formula φc specifies this cause: once the execution so far satisfies φc, the dynamics permanently switch from Phase 1 to Phase 2. The agent does not observe the phase directly. Instead, it receives stochastic signals correlated with the active phase, which provide only indirect evidence that the transition has occurred. We illustrate this with a genetic therapy gridworld (Fig-ure 1). The agent navigates a 5 × 5 grid with four gene sites (G1 to G4) and a medicine cell ( M ). The state includes a symptom level D ∈ { 0, . . . , 9} and a harm level H ∈{0, . . . , 9}. In Phase 1, the symptom level increases by 1 with probability 0.75, whereas in Phase 2, it decreases by 1 with probability 0.75. Otherwise, it remains unchanged. arXiv:2609.07461v1 [cs.LG] 7 Sep 2026 Administering the medicine reduces the symptom level by 5, but it also resets harm to its maximum (this way, no continuous administering of medicine is possible due to harmful side effects). On every non-medicine step, harm decreases by 1 until it reaches 0. Applying medicine while the current harm level is positive terminates the episode, so treatment timing matters. The phase transition is triggered by visiting gene sites in the order G1, G 2, G 1, G 4.Figure 2 shows that our method, Temporal-Causal In-ference for Reinforcement Learning (TCIRL), learns the correct gene-site sequence to trigger Phase 2, after which the symptoms decline steadily. Standard Q-learning [5], which lacks memory for the required temporal pattern, remains in Phase 1. Our approach maintains a hypothesis DFA H that models the temporal cause. Starting from a trivial one-state hypoth-esis which rejects every label sequence, the agent refines H

over training by exploiting the stochastic evidence available in each episode. The method requires domain knowledge that specifies exclusive characteristics of each phase. We call these markers : in the genetic therapy example, a symptom increase can only occur in Phase 1, and a spontaneous recovery can only occur in Phase 2. After each episode, the agent checks whether the episode label sequence is inconsistent with its current hypothesis. If so, a Boolean satisfiability (SAT) solver synthesizes a new minimal DFA consistent with all prior observations. The markers are stochastic: they need not fire on every episode, and individual observations may be ambiguous. However, we assume that they are phase-exclusive and that, for every wrong hypothesis, there exists some reachable episode whose markers expose the error (Assumption 2). Un-der this assumption, we prove that the hypothesis converges almost surely to the correct cause DFA (Theorem 1), and the agent converges to an optimal policy (Theorem 2). We validate TCIRL on two domains with opposite causal effects, and compare its performance to a baseline with full access to the causal structure from the start. In genetic therapy, triggering the cause is beneficial (symptoms de-cline). In a traffic signal environment, triggering it is harmful (congestion increases). In both cases, TCIRL recovers the correct cause DFA and matches the full-information baseline. To summarize, our work makes the following contribu-tions: 1) A two-phase NMDP formalization for environments with hidden temporal causes, and TCIRL, an algorithm that jointly learns a policy and infers a cause DFA via counterexample-driven SAT-based synthesis. 2) Almost-sure convergence guarantees: the inferred hy-pothesis recovers the true cause language on all at-tainable label sequences (Theorem 1), and the policy converges to the optimal value of the NMDP (Theo-rem 2). 3) Experimental validation on two control domains, a genetic therapy gridworld where triggering the cause is beneficial and a traffic signal environment where it is harmful, showing that TCIRL recovers the correct cause DFA and matches the full-information baseline in both settings. II. BACKGROUND We study a restricted class of NMDPs in which the non-Markovian dependence arises from a hidden causal mecha-nism. The system evolves in one of two Markovian phases, and the active phase is determined by whether a temporal pattern in the label history has occurred. This setting is common in control, where unobserved mode switches alter the local dynamics while the controller still observes only the physical state. To specify such patterns, we use Linear Temporal Logic over finite traces (LTL f ) [6], which can express sequencing, eventuality, and persistence constraints over propositional labels. The key property we exploit is that every LTL f formula can be compiled into a DFA, so monitoring whether the pattern has occurred reduces to tracking a finite automaton state. 

Definition 1 (Labeled NMDP) . A labeled non-Markovian decision process (NMDP) is a tuple 

N = (S, A, P, R, μ 0, γ, AP , L ) where S is a finite state space, A is a finite action space, P : ( S×A)+ ×S → ∆( S) is a history-dependent transition function, R : S × A × S → R

is a Markovian reward function, μ0 is an initial state distribution, γ ∈ [0 , 1) is the discount factor, AP is a finite set of atomic propositions, and L : S × A × S → 2AP labels each transition. 

An agent generates trajectories s0, a 0, s 1, . . . with s0 ∼

μ0 and sn+1 ∼ P ( · | s0, a 0, . . . , s n, a n). Each transi-tion produces a label L(st, a t, s t+1 ) ∈ 2AP , and every trajectory a label sequence, defined by L(s0) = ε and 

L(s0, a 0, . . . , s t) = L(s0, a 0, s 1) · · · L(st−1, a t−1, s t). A la-bel sequence w = σ0 · · · σk−1 is attainable if there exists a trajectory s0, a 0, . . . , s k, . . . with s0 ∈ supp( μ0), positive transition probability at every step, and L(si, a i, s i+1 ) = σi

for every i = 0 , . . . , k − 1. A label sequence is m-attainable 

if it is attainable and has length at most m.Our focus is a structured hidden-state problem in which the relevant past is summarized by a single regular temporal condition on the label history. 

Definition 2 (LTL f ). LTL f (Linear Temporal Logic over finite traces) formulas over AP are defined by the grammar 

φ ::= p | ¬ φ | φ1 ∧ φ2 | ⃝ φ | φ1 U φ2 where p ∈ AP .Derived operators: ♢φ ≡ ⊤ U φ (eventually) and □φ ≡¬♢¬φ (always). Satisfaction is defined over finite traces w =

σ0 · · · σn−1 with σi ∈ 2AP : w, i |= p iff p ∈ σi; w, i |= ⃝φ

iff i < n −1 and w, i +1 |= φ; w, i |= φ1 U φ2 iff there exists 

j ≥ i with j < n such that w, j |= φ2 and w, k |= φ1 for all i ≤ k < j . We write w |= φ for w, 0 |= φ. The language of φ is L(φ) = {w ∈ 2AP ∗ | w |= φ}.

We now formalize this two-phase causal structure. The non-Markovian dependence is captured by a single LTL f

formula φc, which we call the cause formula. We refer to 

L(φc) as the cause language of the NMDP. When the label history satisfies φc, the system switches permanently from 

P1 to P2 dynamics. 

Assumption 1 (Two-Phase NMDP) . There exist Markovian kernels P1, P 2 : S × A × S → [0 , 1] and an LTL f formula φc

over AP such that for every trajectory ξn = s0, a 0, . . . , s n

and action a ∈ A,

P (sn+1 | ξn, a ) = 

(

P2(sn+1 | sn, a ) if L(ξn) |= φc,P1(sn+1 | sn, a ) otherwise. 

(1) 

The formula φc is closed under extension: w |= φc implies 

wv |= φc for all v.

The reward R is Markovian; only the cause formula 

φc introduces dependence on the past. The agent observes 

st but not the phase, so the causal mechanism is hidden. Extension-closure captures the irreversibility of the effect: once the cause fires, it remains satisfied regardless of future observations. Because φc is an LTL f formula, it can be compiled into a DFA that monitors the label history and tracks which phase is active. This is the finite-memory structure that TCIRL seeks to recover from data. 

Definition 3 (DFA) . A deterministic finite automaton (DFA) is a tuple A = ( Q, q 0, Σ, δ, F ) with finite state set Q, initial state q0 ∈ Q, alphabet Σ, transition function δ : Q × Σ →

Q, and accepting states F ⊆ Q. We write δ∗(q, w ) for the state reached from q after processing word w. Its language is L(A) = {w ∈ Σ∗ | δ∗(q0, w ) ∈ F }. A DFA is successor-closed if ∀q ∈ F, ∀σ ∈ Σ : δ(q, σ ) ∈ F .

By the LTL f -to-DFA correspondence [6], the cause lan-guage is recognized by some DFA. Because φc is closed under extension, there exists a successor-closed DFA Ac

with L(Ac) = L(φc). Once a run enters its accepting set, every continuation remains accepting. Such a DFA is not unique; many successor-closed DFAs recognize the same cause language. We write nφc to denote the minimum state count among all of them. III. METHOD TCIRL jointly learns a policy and infers the hidden cause DFA from episode data. Once a correct cause monitor is learned, the problem reduces to a standard product-MDP construction. The real difficulty is to identify that monitor from partial stochastic evidence gathered during RL. We first demonstrate how a hypothesis DFA induces a product MDP. Second, we define the stochastic markers that provide indirect evidence about the cause and formalize our method for counterexample detection. Then we describe the SAT-based synthesis step used to update the hypothesis. Finally, we summarize the overall training procedure and state our convergence guarantees. 

A. Problem Setting 

Any successor-closed DFA recognizing the cause language 

L(φc) can serve as a phase monitor. Stepping it on each transition label and checking acceptance determines whether 

φc has been satisfied. However, the agent does not know φc

and therefore cannot construct such a DFA directly. Instead, it maintains a hypothesis DFA H = ( Q, q 0, 2AP , δ, F ) and interprets q ∈ F as Phase 2 and q /∈ F as Phase 1. We write phase( q) = 2 if q ∈ F and 1 otherwise. The product MDP MH = ( S ×Q, μ 0 ×{ q0}, A, P H, R H, γ ) has transition kernel 

PH(( s, q ), a, (s′, q ′)) =

(

Pphase( q)(s′ | s, a ) if q′ = δ(q, L (s, a, s ′)) ,

0 otherwise, and Markovian reward RH(( s, q ), a, (s′, q ′)) = R(s, a, s ′).If u ∈ L (H) ⇐⇒ u |= φc for every attainable label sequence u, then the hypothesis assigns the same phase as the true cause along every reachable trajectory. Consequently, 

MH has the same transition dynamics as the NMDP on reachable states. In Theorem 2, we show that the optimal values of MH and the NMDP coincide. 

B. Marker Assumption 

Each completed episode yields a single label sequence over 2AP . TCIRL uses that same sequence both to run the current hypothesis DFA and to test whether marker evidence appears before or after a given prefix. The agent cannot observe the phase directly. Instead, TCIRL relies on two atomic propositions xr , x a ∈ AP whose occurrence in transition labels is exclusive to one phase. The rejection marker xr can only appear in Phase 1, certifying that the cause has not yet fired, and the acceptance marker 

xa can only appear in Phase 2, certifying that it has. In the genetic therapy example, a symptom increase serves as 

xr and a spontaneous recovery (as opposed to one caused by directly applying the medicine) serves as xa. Identifying such markers requires domain knowledge about the phase-dependent dynamics, but not knowledge of the cause formula 

φc itself. For label sequences u, w with w extending u, define:  

> •

Wr (u, w ): the suffix of w after prefix u contains some symbol σ with xr ∈ σ. 

> •

Wa(u, w ): the symbol immediately after prefix u in w

contains xa.

Assumption 2 (Marker Soundness and Completeness) . Fix two propositions xr , x a ∈ AP . We assume that the following holds for every attainable label sequence u:

1) Soundness. If u |= φc and w is an attainable extension of u, then Wr (u, w ) does not hold. If w is an attainable extension of u and Wa(u, w ) holds, then u |= φc.

2) Completeness. If u̸ |= φc, there exists an attainable extension w of u with Wr (u, w ). If u |= φc, there exists an attainable extension w of u with Wa(u, w ).

The markers may be probabilistic: Assumption 2 does not require every episode to expose xr or xa. It requires only that every incorrect hypothesis has an attainable witness whose markers expose the error. C. Counterexample Detection 

A completed episode yields an attainable label sequence 

w. We say w is a counterexample to hypothesis H if either: 1) there exists a prefix u of w with H accepting u and 

Wr (u, w ) holding (false positive), or 2) there exists a prefix u of w with H rejecting u and 

Wa(u, w ) holding (false negative). Detection proceeds by running H on the label sequence, checking at each prefix whether the hypothesis state is consistent with all xr and xa evidence in the episode (Algo-rithm 1, line 15). TCIRL retains detected counterexamples in the set X (line 16). 

D. SAT-Based Cause DFA Synthesis 

When a counterexample is detected, TCIRL re-synthesizes the hypothesis from scratch (line 18). The goal is to find a minimal DFA consistent with all marker evidence accumu-lated so far. To this end, the solver encodes the constraints for a fixed candidate state count n as a Boolean satisfiability (SAT) instance ΨX 

> n

and queries a SAT solver. It iterates 

n = 1 , 2, 3, . . . until the first satisfiable instance, yielding a minimal consistent DFA H. Because φc defines a regular language, the true cause language is recognized by some successor-closed DFA, so the search terminates at some finite 

n, in particular at some n ≤ nφc .From the counterexample set X , we extract finite certified prefix sets: 

N (X ) = {u : ∃w ∈ X , W r (u, w )},P (X ) = {u : ∃w ∈ X , W a(u, w )}.

By Assumption 2, every u ∈ N (X ) satisfies u̸ |= φc and every u ∈ P (X ) satisfies u |= φc. Let Pref( X ) = {u :

∃w ∈ X , ∃v such that uv = w} denote the prefix set of the observed counterexamples. For a candidate state count n with states {0, . . . , n −1},the formula ΨX 

> n

uses three sets of propositional variables: transition variables dp,σ,q asserting that state p moves to q

on symbol σ; acceptance variables fq marking state q as ac-cepting; and run variables xu,q asserting that the DFA run on prefix u ∈ Pref( X ) ends in state q. The execution variables range over prefixes of the observed counterexamples, while 

N (X ) and P (X ) constrain whether the reached states must be rejecting or accepting. Following JIRP [7], we construct the formula ΨX 

> n

to impose the following constraints: 1) Determinism and totality: for each (p, σ ), exactly one 

q satisfies dp,σ,q .2) Execution base and consistency: xε, 0 holds, exactly one state is assigned to each prefix in Pref( X ), and for each non-empty prefix uσ : xu,p ∧dp,σ,q ⇒ xuσ,q .3) Successor-closed acceptance: fp ∧ dp,σ,q ⇒ fq for all 

σ.4) Absorbing accepting: fq ⇒ dq,σ,q for all σ.5) Single accepting state: exactly one q satisfies fq .6) Consistency constraints: xu,q ⇒ ¬ fq for u ∈ N (X ),and xu,q ⇒ fq for u ∈ P (X ).

Algorithm 1 TCIRL: Temporal-Causal Inference for RL  

> 1:

Input: NMDP N , markers xr , x a, optimistic value qinit ,train steps T 

> 2:

Initialize H ← trivial 1-state rejecting DFA  

> 3:

Initialize Q ← qinit over S × QH × A 

> 4:

Initialize counterexample set X ← ∅ and global step counter t ← 0 

> 5:

while t < T do  

> 6:

Reset the environment, set hypothesis state q ← q0,and set episode trace w ← ε 

> 7:

while episode not ended and t < T do  

> 8:

Observe st 

> 9:

Select at via ε-greedy on Q(st, q, ·) 

> 10:

Execute at, observe reward rt, next state st+1 ,and label ℓt 

> 11:

q′ ← δH(q, ℓ t); append ℓt to w 

> 12:

Q(st, q, a t) ← rt + γ max a′ Q(st+1 , q ′, a ′) 

> 13:

q ← q′ 

> 14:

t ← t + 1  

> 15:

if ISCOUNTEREXAMPLE (w, H, x r , x a) then  

> 16:

X ← X ∪ { w} 

> 17:

Hold ← H  

> 18:

H ← SATS YNTHESIZE (X ) 

> 19:

if H̸ = Hold then  

> 20:

Reinitialize Q ← qinit over S × QH × A 

> 21:

Return: Q, H

The formula ΨX 

> n

is a conjunction of these constraints which ensure two important properties: (1) it is satisfiable if and only if there exists an n-state DFA consistent with X , and (2) any satisfying assignment contains enough information to reconstruct such a DFA (one just reads off the transition table from dp,σ,q and the acceptance vector from fq ). Con-straint 3 reflects extension-closure of φc. Constraints 4 and 5 hold without loss of generality for minimal successor-closed DFAs: under successor-closure all accepting states accept identical suffixes, so minimization merges them into a single absorbing state. 

E. Training Procedure 

Algorithm 1 contains the pseudocode for our method. The agent performs ε-greedy Q-learning on the product of the base state and the current hypothesis state. Label sequences from completed episodes are added to X only when they are counterexamples to the current DFA. After each observed counterexample, our SAT-based synthesis method described in Section III-D recomputes the smallest consistent DFA. If the new hypothesis differs from the old one, TCIRL resets the Q-table to the optimistic initialization qinit before continuing. This prevents carrying over values learned under incompatible automaton semantics. 

F. Theoretical Guarantees 

We establish two main results: almost-sure recovery of the true cause language (Theorem 1) and convergence to an optimal policy (Theorem 2). Both proofs rely on an exploration property of ε-greedy policies. 

Lemma 1 (Exploration) . Under ε-greedy exploration with 

ε > 0 and episode length at least m, every m-attainable label sequence is observed infinitely often almost surely. Proof. For any m-attainable sequence w, there is a wit-nessing trajectory with positive probability under ε-greedy. The probability of not observing w in n consecutive episodes decays as (1 − pw)n → 0, so w is observed infinitely often a.s. □

For each wrong DFA with at most nφc states, consider the length of its shortest counterexample. Let m∗ denote the maximum over these lengths. This constant is finite because the set of such DFAs is finite and each wrong hypothesis has a counterexample by the completeness part of Assumption 2. To precisely compute m∗, one can adapt a similar procedure outlined in JIRP [7], but we do not repeat this technical result here. 

Theorem 1 (Exact Recovery) . Under Assumptions 1 and 2, with ε-greedy exploration ( ε > 0) and episode length at least m∗, the hypothesis sequence stabilizes almost surely at a final hypothesis Hfinal satisfying 

u ∈ L (Hfinal ) ⇐⇒ u |= φc

for every attainable label sequence u.Proof. The argument proceeds by contradiction. First, the hypothesis sequence must stabilize: each re-inference yields a minimal DFA consistent with the accumulated sample, and the true cause language is recognized by a successor-closed DFA with nφc states. Hence every inferred hypothesis has at most nφc states. Moreover, whenever a counterexample 

w is added, it certifies some prefix u that must be rejecting or accepting, while the current hypothesis classifies u the opposite way. The next SAT solution must satisfy that new certified constraint, so it cannot equal the old hypothesis. Only finitely many such bounded-size hypotheses exist, so only finitely many re-inferences can occur. Second, suppose the final hypothesis Hfinal misclassifies some attainable u.By Assumption 2 (completeness), there exists an attainable witness w that is a counterexample to Hfinal with |w| ≤ m∗.Lemma 1 guarantees that w is observed almost surely, which would trigger another re-inference, contradicting stabiliza-tion. Therefore Hfinal correctly classifies all attainable label sequences. □

Theorem 2 (Policy Convergence) . Under the conditions of Theorem 1 and the standard Q-learning assumptions on learning rates and continued exploration after the final hypothesis update, TCIRL converges a.s. to the optimal Q-function of MHfinal . The resulting greedy policy achieves the optimal value of the NMDP. Proof. After stabilization, Hfinal assigns the correct phase on every reachable trajectory. The product MDP MHfinal 

therefore has the same transition dynamics as the NMDP on reachable states. Given a stationary policy π on MHfinal ,define the induced history-dependent policy on the NMDP by feeding π the base state together with the monitored DFA state δ∗(q0, L (ξt)) of the current history ξt. Conversely, any history-dependent NMDP policy lifts to a policy on MHfinal 

by ignoring the automaton component and using only the projected base-state history. Under the natural coupling that shares the initial state and external randomness, correspond-ing trajectories in the two models then use the same action, transition kernel, and one-step reward at every time. So the induced and lifted policies have the same discounted return, which implies that the optimal values of MHfinal and the NMDP coincide. Standard Q-learning convergence [5] on the fixed finite MDP MHfinal therefore yields the optimal Q-function, and the resulting greedy policy achieves the optimal NMDP value. □

IV. EXPERIMENTS We evaluate TCIRL on two scenarios with hidden cause DFAs and opposite causal effects. These domains demon-strate how inferring the hidden causal structure in two-phase dynamics enables effective policy learning. In each case study, we compare five algorithms: 1) TCIRL : our method infers H via counterexample-driven SAT synthesis using the soundness marker xr

and completeness marker xa.2) Q-learning (cause known) : the agent observes the correct cause DFA state from the start, serving as a full-information upper bound for tabular methods. 3) Q-learning (cause unknown) : the agent does not observe any cause DFA state. 4) DQN (4) : we employ a deep Q-network [8] with a two-layer MLP ( 128 neurons each) and a 4-frame observation history buffer. 5) DQN (3) : we limit the DQN to a 3-frame history, which is insufficient to capture the temporal depen-dencies required by the cause formulas. All agents utilize ε-greedy exploration with a discount factor 

γ = 0 .99 and a learning rate α = 0 .1. The exploration probability ε decays linearly from 1.0 to 0.01 over 100 k steps for the traffic domain and 200 k steps for the genetic therapy domain. Episodes are truncated after 100 steps. We report the interquartile mean (IQM) with bootstrap 95% confidence intervals over 50 independent training seeds. We evaluate each trained policy on 50 greedy episodes using a fixed set of evaluation seeds. 

A. Case Study 1 

We first investigate the genetic therapy scenario intro-duced in Section I. The cause formula is defined as φc =

♢(G1 ∧ ⃝ (♢(G2 ∧ ⃝ (♢(G1 ∧ ⃝ (♢(G4))))))) , representing the specific sequence required by the genetic therapy. Site 

G3 is a distractor not involved in the cause formula, and the medicine cell M affects the dynamics but is not itself causal. To track phase transitions, we define two markers: 

xr = inc (a symptom increase possible only in Phase 1) and 

xa = dec _recovery (a stochastic recovery event possible only in Phase 2). 0k 100 k 200 k 300 k 400 k 500 k   

> 00.20.40.60.81
> Training Steps Avg. Reward per Step
> TCIRL (ours) DQN (4) DQN (3) Q-learning Q-learning (cause known)

Fig. 3: Genetic therapy: training reward.      

> 020 40 60 80 100 02468
> Time in Eval Episode Symptom Level

Fig. 4: Genetic therapy: symptom level during evaluation. Figure 3 shows the average reward achieved per training step for the genetic therapy task. These results demonstrate that TCIRL’s policy successfully converges to the optimal strategy, closely matching the performance of the Q-Learning baseline with cause known and DQN with a buffer of 4 obser-vation frames. In contrast, decreasing DQN’s history buffer to 3 frames or using Q-learning without cause knowledge leads to a failure to learn an effective policy. We examine the symptom levels during evaluation episodes (Figure 4) to identify the specific strategies learned by each algorithm. While all other algorithms initially use a single medication dose to reduce the starting symptom level, DQN with a 4-frame history skips this step and directly goes for genetic therapy. Only TCIRL, DQN (4), and Q-learning with access to the causal DFA discover a consistent strategy to modify the genes and trigger the phase transition to the cured state. Although a deep Q-network with a sufficient history buffer can capture these temporal dynamics, we observe that DQN with a smaller history buffer fails to learn a meaningful strategy, leaving symptom levels high. Similarly, the Q-learning without causal knowledge prioritizes the immediate rewards from medication but fails to discover the underlying gene modification sequence. 

B. Case Study 2 

For the second case study, we modify the traffic signal environment found in prior work [9]. The agent manages a three-intersection road where traffic enters from the left-most side and flows through successive queues y0, y 1, y 2 ∈        

> 0k100 k200 k300 k400 k500 k
> 020 40
> Training Steps Total Reward per Episode
> TCIRL (ours) DQN (4) DQN (3) Q-learning Q-learning (cause known)

Fig. 5: Traffic signal: training reward.      

> 020 40 60 80 100 010 20
> Time in Eval Episode Total Queue

Fig. 6: Traffic signal: total queue level during evaluation. 

{0, . . . , 8} (if yi = k, there are k vehicles waiting in the ith queue). Exactly one intersection is red at any time; the agent uses the hold action to maintain the red light’s position and the advance action to shift it to the right with at least one hold between advances. The reward r = 1 − max i yi 

> 9

incentivizes the agent to prevent any single queue from becoming a bottleneck. The cause formula triggers a phase shift after three con-secutive hold-advance cycles ( h, a, h, a, h, a ). In Phase 1, departures from each intersection follow Geom(0 .7) and new arrivals are Bernoulli(0 .5) . In Phase 2, the dynamics become reversed: arrivals now follow Geom(0 .4) and departures are 

Bernoulli(0 .5) , increasing congestion. The rejection marker 

xr fires when 2 or more cars depart from y2 in a single step, which is only possible under the geometric departure distribution of Phase 1. Conversely, the acceptance marker xa

fires when 2 or more cars arrive at y0 in a single step, which is only possible under the geometric arrival distribution of Phase 2. Intuitively, these dynamics model how synchronized light cycles make a specific route through the intersections ex-cessively attractive to outside traffic. As this road becomes the optimal route, navigation algorithms redirect city traffic onto it, eventually overwhelming the system and causing congestion. Unlike the genetic therapy case, the optimal policy here must avoid transitioning to Phase 2, where queues increase at a faster rate. Figure 5 shows the cumulative reward per training episode, indicating that TCIRL’s convergence speed closely ap-0%     

> 50 %
> 100 %100 6.6100 100 0
> Trajectories in second phase (%) (a) Genetic therapy.
> 38 .582 30 .953 .777 .6
> (b) Traffic signal. TCIRL Q-Learn. Q-Learn. (known) DQN (4) DQN (3)

Fig. 7: Evaluation trajectories reaching Phase 2. proaches the Q-learning baseline with known cause. In contrast, Q-learning without a causal mechanism converges to a significantly lower reward, reflecting the performance gap between policies that capture the hidden phase structure and those that do not. While the impact of the history buffer length on DQN is less pronounced here than in the genetic therapy scenario, a clear difference in the efficacy of the learned policies remains. These results are further illustrated by the evaluation metrics in Figure 6: both TCIRL and Q-learning with known cause maintain consistently lower vehicle counts, whereas the other approaches settle into higher queue levels. 

C. Cause Activation Analysis 

We investigate the transition between the two phases by analyzing the fraction of evaluation trajectories that trigger the cause formula in Figure 7. For the genetic therapy scenario in Case Study 1, where cause activation is required for the optimal cured state, TCIRL triggers the cause in all evaluation episodes, matching the Q-learning with known cause. On the other hand, the traffic control environment penalizes the transition, and we observe an inverse relation-ship between the reward achieved by the learned policy and the fraction of trajectories that end in the second phase. TCIRL infers the underlying causal structure through a process of iterative re-inferences. As shown in Figure 8, the cumulative number of these re-inferences plateaus early in both domains, reaching a stable state long before the training budget is exhausted. This early stabilization indicates that the agent typically identifies the correct hypothesis in the initial stages of training (within the first 10% of training steps in our case studies). V. RELATED WORK 

a) NMDPs, regular decision processes, and latent-mode models: Non-Markovian decision processes (NMDPs) generalize MDPs by allowing rewards and dynamics to depend on the trajectory history; Bacchus et al. [2] show that temporal logic specifications of this dependence can be compiled into auxiliary state variables that restore the Markov property. Brafman and De Giacomo [3] formalize regular decision processes (RDPs), where both rewards and dynamics may depend on regular properties of the history.      

> 0k100 k200 k300 k400 k500 k
> 024
> Training Steps Re-inferences Genetic therapy Traffic signal

Fig. 8: TCIRL cumulative re-inferences during training. Our setting is a structured special case: a single temporal condition over labels induces a permanent switch between two Markovian transition kernels, while the reward remains Markovian. These approaches assume the temporal spec-ification is known; TCIRL must infer it from data. The closest prior learning result is Abadi and Brafman [10], whose model-based method clusters sampled histories by empirical next-state distributions, learns a Mealy machine identifying those clusters, and plans with MCTS using the estimated per-cluster dynamics. The learned automaton is thus part of a predictive generative model, not just a monitor for which transition regime is active. TCIRL instead learns only the finite-memory partition needed for control, namely whether the label history is before or after the hidden cause event, and leaves value estimation to model-free Q-learning. This narrower target enables an exact SAT-based inference step and almost-sure recovery and convergence guarantees not provided in the RDP learning work. General POMDP methods and hidden-mode or hidden-parameter MDPs also model latent variables that affect dynamics [11], [12], [13], [14], but they assume a latent state space to track rather than inferring a regular-language monitor from trajectory labels. 

b) Reward machines and automaton-based RL: Reward machines [15] expose non-Markovian reward structure as a finite automaton and support counterfactual updates across automaton states. JIRP [7] jointly infers reward machines and policies in a SAT-based counterexample loop, and Xu et al. [16] accelerate that loop with active learning. Our work is closest to this line because it also alternates model-free RL with automaton refinement. The key difference is that our automaton governs transition dynamics rather than rewards. As a result, counterexamples are not read directly from re-ward traces, but certified through stochastic phase-exclusive markers. The reward machine inferred by JIRP, even if that algorithm converged in our setting, could not serve as a cause monitor, because rewards do not track the phase transition directly. Moreover, we do not implement counterfactual updates in TCIRL, because in our setting, changing the automaton state can change the transition kernel, biasing the Bellman target. A restricted form of this optimization could be implemented by only considering counterfactual automaton states which give the same acceptance decision. 

c) Temporal logic and automata inference: LTL f pro-vides the finite-trace temporal logic foundation we use [6]. In RL and control, temporal-logic specifications are usually compiled into product MDPs when the specification is known in advance, either as a control objective or as a reward description [17], [18], [19], [20]. TCIRL uses temporal logic differently: the relevant specification is hidden and must be inferred from data. At the automata-learning level, Heule and Verwer [21] identify DFAs exactly from accepted and rejected words. Here the supervision is prefix-level but partial: each sampled trace can certify an initial block of rejecting prefixes and, later in the same trace, one or more accepting prefixes, leaving at most an uncertified band between them. The SAT step therefore receives richer prefix-level constraints than standard passive DFA learning, though still less complete information than settings where an output is observed at every prefix. 

d) Causal reasoning in RL: Causal RL aims to leverage causal structure for more sample-efficient learning [22], [23], [24]. Our use of “causal” is narrower: we refer to a temporal pattern that changes the transition dynamics, not to an interventionist causal model in the sense of Pearl [23]. The closest work is STL-CIRL [9], which uses notions from Actual Causality [25] to mine causal Signal Temporal Logic specifications via counterexample-guided refinement and directly inspired our benchmark environments, even though we substantially changed their semantics. TCIRL differs by using LTL f over finite traces with DFA-based monitoring, focusing on hidden transition dynamics rather than reward structure, and providing convergence guarantees under the marker assumption. VI. CONCLUSION We presented TCIRL, a framework for jointly learning policies and inferring hidden cause DFAs in environments with sparse stochastic effect signals. Two atomic marker propositions convert noisy observations into certified coun-terexample information for a SAT-based cause DFA synthesis loop. Under a marker soundness and completeness assump-tion, the hypothesis converges almost surely to the correct cause language, and the agent converges to an optimal policy. On two domains (a genetic therapy gridworld with a 5-state cause and beneficial trigger, and a traffic signal pipeline with a 7-state cause and harmful trigger), TCIRL recovers the true automaton and matches the full-information baseline. 

Limitations and future work: The marker assumption requires domain expertise to identify phase-exclusive ob-servable events. The structural constraints model one-shot causation but not cyclic patterns. Promising directions in-clude automatic marker discovery and an extension to cause automata which can model general regular temporal patterns. REFERENCES [1] R. S. Sutton and A. G. Barto, Reinforcement learning - an introduction, 2nd Edition . MIT Press, 2018. [2] F. Bacchus, C. Boutilier, and A. J. Grove, “Structured solution methods for non-Markovian decision processes,” in Proceedings of the Fourteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) 1997 . AAAI Press / The MIT Press, 1997, pp. 112–117. [3] R. I. Brafman and G. D. Giacomo, “Regular decision processes: A model for non-Markovian domains,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) 2019 . ijcai.org, 2019, pp. 5516–5522. [4] M. L. Littman, “Memoryless policies: theoretical limitations and practical results,” in Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Simulation of Adaptive Behavior: From Animals to Animats 3 , ser. SAB94. MIT Press, 1994, pp. 238–245. [5] C. J. C. H. Watkins and P. Dayan, “Technical note q-learning,” Mach. Learn. , vol. 8, pp. 279–292, 1992. [6] G. D. Giacomo and M. Y. Vardi, “Linear temporal logic and linear dynamic logic on finite traces,” in Proceedings of the 23rd Inter-national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) 2013 .IJCAI/AAAI, 2013, pp. 854–860. [7] Z. Xu, I. Gavran, Y. Ahmad, R. Majumdar, D. Neider, U. Topcu, and B. Wu, “Joint inference of reward machines and policies for reinforcement learning,” in Proceedings of the Thirtieth International Conference on Automated Planning and Scheduling (ICAPS) 2020 .AAAI Press, 2020, pp. 590–598. [8] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, et al. , “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,” Nat. , vol. 518, no. 7540, pp. 529–533, 2015. [9] H. P. Aria and Z. Xu, “Mining causal signal temporal logic formulas for efficient reinforcement learning with temporally extended tasks,” in International Conference on Neuro-symbolic Systems (NeSy) 2025 ,ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research. PMLR, 2025, pp. 524–542. [10] E. Abadi and R. I. Brafman, “Learning and solving regular decision processes,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) 2020 . ijcai.org, 2020, pp. 1948–1954. [11] R. D. Smallwood and E. J. Sondik, “The optimal control of partially observable markov processes over a finite horizon,” Oper. Res. , vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 1071–1088, 1973. [12] L. P. Kaelbling, M. L. Littman, and A. R. Cassandra, “Planning and acting in partially observable stochastic domains,” Artif. Intell. , vol. 101, no. 1-2, pp. 99–134, 1998. [13] S. P. M. Choi, D. Yeung, and N. L. Zhang, Hidden-Mode Markov Decision Processes for Nonstationary Sequential Decision Making ,ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2001, pp. 264– 287. [14] F. Doshi-Velez and G. D. Konidaris, “Hidden parameter markov decision processes: A semiparametric regression approach for discov-ering latent task parametrizations,” in Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) 2016 .IJCAI/AAAI Press, 2016, pp. 1432–1440. [15] R. T. Icarte, T. Q. Klassen, et al. , “Reward machines: Exploiting reward function structure in reinforcement learning,” J. Artif. Intell. Res. , vol. 73, pp. 173–208, 2022. [16] Z. Xu, B. Wu, et al. , “Active finite reward automaton inference and reinforcement learning using queries and counterexamples,” in Pro-ceedings of the 20th International Conference on Correct Hardware Design and Verification Methods (CD-MAKE) 2021 . Springer, 2021, pp. 115–135. [17] D. Sadigh, E. S. Kim, et al. , “A learning based approach to control synthesis of markov decision processes for linear temporal logic specifications,” in 53rd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) 2014 . IEEE, 2014, pp. 1091–1096. [18] M. Hasanbeig, Y. Kantaros, et al. , “Reinforcement learning for tempo-ral logic control synthesis with probabilistic satisfaction guarantees,” in 

58th IEEE Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) 2019 . IEEE, 2019, pp. 5338–5343. [19] F. Bacchus, C. Boutilier, and A. J. Grove, “Rewarding behaviors,” in Proceedings of the Thirteenth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) 1996 . AAAI Press / The MIT Press, 1996, pp. 1160–1167. [20] A. Camacho, O. Chen, et al. , “Non-Markovian rewards expressed in LTL: Guiding Search Via Reward Shaping,” in Proceedings of the Seventh Annual Symposium on Combinatorial Search (SOCS) 2017 .AAAI Press, 2017, pp. 159–160. [21] M. Heule and S. Verwer, “Exact DFA identification using SAT solvers,” in Grammatical Inference: Theoretical Results and Applica-tions, 10th International Colloquium (ICGI) 2010 , ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, 2010, pp. 66–79. [22] Y. Zeng, R. Cai, et al. , “A survey on causal reinforcement learning,” IEEE Trans. Neural Networks Learn. Syst. , vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 5942– 5962, 2025. [23] J. Pearl, Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference , 2nd ed. Cam-bridge University Press, 2009. [24] C. Lu, B. Schölkopf, and J. M. Hernández-Lobato, “Deconfounding reinforcement learning in observational set-tings,” CoRR , vol. abs/1812.10576, 2018. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1812.10576 [25] J. Y. Halpern, Actual Causality . The MIT Press, 08 2016. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/10809.001.0001