Title: 11449_Deep_Edge_Filter_Return_.pdf

URL Source: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=QcItn1s1jO

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Deep Edge Filter: Return of the Human-Crafted Layer in Deep Learning 

Dongkwan Lee ∗ Junhoo Lee ∗

Seoul National University 

{biancco,mrjunoo,nojunk}@snu.ac.kr 

Nojun Kwak †

## Abstract 

We introduce the Deep Edge Filter, a novel approach that applies high-pass filter-ing to deep neural network features to improve model generalizability. Our method is motivated by our hypothesis that neural networks encode task-relevant semantic information in high-frequency components while storing domain-specific biases in low-frequency components of deep features. By subtracting low-pass filtered outputs from original features, our approach isolates generalizable representations while preserving architectural integrity. Experimental results across diverse do-mains such as Vision, Text, 3D, and Audio demonstrate consistent performance improvements regardless of model architecture and data modality. Analysis re-veals that our method induces feature sparsification and effectively isolates high-frequency components, providing empirical validation of our core hypothesis. The code is available at https://github.com/dongkwani/DeepEdgeFilter .

## 1 Introduction 

Edge filters have long been a widely used classical technique in image processing to effectively capture relevant information, providing strong priors that are robust to various types of noise while effectively extracting semantic information. However, modern deep learning remains vulnerable to perturbation and domain shift [25, 23]. This is because the superficial low-level texture dependen-cies acquired by deep learning models during training further exacerbate their vulnerability to per-turbations [8]. This vulnerability is evident in the fields of adversarial attack [10, 7] and domain adaptation [18, 42]. For example, even small adversarial perturbations, difficult for the human eye to detect, can cause significant confusion in models, or the performance of models can be greatly degraded simply because of a change from day to night. Why have we lost knowledge of edge detection? Indeed, numerous past attempts have sought to integrate edge detection techniques into the deep learning domain [32, 48]. The core idea was to ap-ply edge detection, or methodologies inspired by it, to input images. These processed images would then be fed into deep learning models, aiming to leverage the inherent robustness of edge detection against perturbations. However, such approaches failed to gain significant traction. This lack of suc-cess can be attributed to two primary factors. Firstly, while applying Edge Filters to images offers the benefit of robustness against perturbations, it conversely leads to the removal of fine-grained image details. This diminishes the informational content fed into deep learning models, limiting the ability to fully leverage the strengths of deep learning models, which excel at processing information-rich inputs. Secondly, classical edge detection was limited to the image domain. This inherent limitation makes it difficult to employ universally within the current deep learning landscape, which increas-ingly focuses on handling diverse data modalities, not only visual data but also a wide array of modalities including natural language, 3D scenes, and audio. 

> ∗Equal Contribution
> †Corresponding Author 39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025).

In this paper, we generalize the concept of Edge Filters for deep features that can be applied directly to deep layers rather than the input layers, combining the benefits of traditional Edge Filters with deep learning to build models robust to perturbations and domain shifts. Our approach is motivated by our hypothesis that deep networks encode task-relevant semantic features at high frequencies and domain-specific biases at low frequencies. If this hypothesis is true, then generalizing Edge Filters (which essentially function as high-pass filters) should help isolate generalizable features. We contextualize this hypothesis based on domain adaptation research and validate it with a simple observation based on ResNet. We define the Edge Filter applied to deep layers as the residual obtained by subtracting the result of low-pass filter (LPF) from the original. Here, we can utilize low-pass filters such as mean, median, and Gaussian kernels. When applying these LPFs to the deep features, the dimensionality of the kernels is naturally tailored to the specific deep learning architecture. Specifically, we applied 2-dimensional kernels to CNN-based architectures and 1-dimensional kernels to transformer-based architectures and MLPs. We validate the universal effectiveness of Edge Filter across diverse modalities, tasks, and archi-tectures. Our experiments span four fundamentally different modalities: Vision, Text, 3D, and Au-dio. For each modality, we selected tasks demanding strong generalization [16, 2, 19]: test-time adaptation [42, 14], sentiment analysis [41], few-shot neural radiance fields [24, 27], and audio classification [34]. Testing on both CNN-based [52] and Transformer-based [6] architectures con-firmed architecture-agnostic applicability. We conducted ablation studies across filter configurations with different domains to demonstrate the consistent effectiveness of our approach. Furthermore, we found that applying the Edge Filter induces feature sparsification, in line with our theoretical sparse-coding framework. This was clearly demonstrated by the significant decrease in activation density following filter application. Moreover, we validate the need of high frequency proof-by-contradiction by showing that applying a low-pass filter impairs generalization ability. We make the following contributions: • We introduce Edge Filter, a filter built on human intuition, that can be applied to the fea-ture of deep neural networks in a modality-agnostic manner to facilitate the extraction of generalizable features. • We propose an Edge Filter for both CNN-based and ViT-based architectures, and empiri-cally demonstrate that the filter enhances the performance of generalizability-crucial tasks across various modalities including image, text, 3D, and audio. • We analyze the experimental results through the lens of layer sparsity and frequency de-composition, and provide extensive ablation studies on Edge Filters for deep features. 

## 2 Related Works 

2.1 Frequency Perspective in Deep Learning 

Research on frequency analysis within deep learning has largely centered on image data and Con-volutional Neural Networks (CNNs), offering valuable insights into how these models encode and process information. It has been observed that CNNs trained on ImageNet exhibit a strong bias towards texture rather than shape, a tendency distinct from human perception, and preferentially recognize textural cues in style-transferred images [8, 45]. Furthermore, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) adhere to the ‘Frequency Principle’, learning low-frequency components earlier than high-frequency ones during training; this phenomenon is often interpreted as an implicit bias arising from the regularity of activation functions [49, 50]. Building on these understandings, various techniques have leveraged frequency concepts to enhance model performance and efficiency [48, 43]. In architectural innovations, the Fourier Convolutional Neural Network [11] has improved efficiency by performing convolutions in the frequency domain using Fast Fourier Transform, while similar efficiency benefits have been achieved through Discrete Cosine Transform operations [9]. From a training perspective, frequency domain data augmenta-tion techniques have proven effective in preventing networks from overfitting to specific frequency components, thereby enhancing generalization capabilities [47, 40]. The capacity of frequency anal-ysis to extract object location and boundary information has also led to successful applications in 2object detection [26]. Despite these advancements, existing approaches have primarily focused on image modalities and rarely explored the direct application of frequency decomposition or filtering techniques to the internal learned representations within deep neural networks. 

2.2 Activation Filtering and Sparsity 

Filter Response Normalization (FRN) [37], when paired with a thresholded linear unit as its activa-tion function, utilizes learnable thresholds to effectively filter activation values. This combination has demonstrated superior performance and versatility compared to conventional batch normalization or group normalization, exhibiting robustness particularly with small batch sizes. Deep Frequency Fil-tering [22] enhances domain generalization by directly filtering the hidden feature representations of a network within the frequency domain. It transforms feature maps into the frequency domain using FFT and then dynamically adjusts each frequency component with a learnable attention mask. Sim-ilarly, the Deep Edge-aware Filter [46] achieved model acceleration by implementing patch-wise processing and spatially varying filtering within an integrated deep learning framework. Recent research on neural network training dynamics has contributed to understanding activation filtering. Studies on the ‘edge of stability’ [1, 4] show training under these conditions creates thresh-old neurons that activate selectively, promoting network sparsity and potentially improving gener-alization. ProSparse [39], designed for LLMs, combines ReLU functions with progressive sparsity regularization to achieve high activation sparsity, enhancing inference efficiency while minimizing performance loss. While these approaches prove effective in specific domains, they haven’t explored general-purpose filtering layers applicable across diverse deep learning applications. 

## 3 Method: Deep Edge Filters 

3.1 Rethinking the Role of Edge Filters Block 1 

> Stem layer
> Block 2
> Edge Filter
> Block 3
> FC

Figure 1: Example of a model ar-chitecture with Edge Filter attached. This figure illustrates the case when the Edge Filter is attached after Block 2 of the base model. We hypothesize that applying Edge Filters to deep features improves generalization by isolating semantic components and suppressing domain-specific features. This hypothesis is supported from a sparse coding perspective, with justification drawn from domain adaptation literature [42]. We define an Edge Filter as a high-pass operator constructed by subtracting a low-pass filtered version of h, the original deep feature: 

Fedge (h) = h − LPF (h), (1) where LPF denotes a low-pass filter such as a mean, median, or Gaussian kernel applied to h.The Edge Filter defined above is attached in series between the blocks of the base model, as shown in Fig. 1. When im-plementing the Edge Filter, parameters such as kernel size and other filter-specific parameters may be additionally required, depending on the type of filter. 

Linear Probing Observation. To validate our hypothesis, we conducted an observational study to examine the impact of low-pass filtering and high-pass edge filtering on linear probing performance. We loaded an ImageNet-pretrained ResNet18 model and attached filters to the output of its final block. While performing linear probing on the CIFAR-100 dataset, only the parameters of the fully connected (FC) classifier are updated, with the feature extractor frozen. For low-pass filtering (LPF), we employed a mean filter with a kernel size of 3. The model was trained for 10 epochs with a learning rate of 0.01. The experimental results are presented in Tab. 1. We observed that applying LPF led to a decrease in performance compared to the unfiltered baseline, while application of an Edge Filter improved per-formance over the baseline. Given the nature of linear probing, where the feature extractor remains unchanged, the model must train the linear classifier using only the feature representations acquired 3Table 1: Linear probing accuracy(%) on train and validation set of an ImageNet pre-trained ResNet18 on the CIFAR-100 dataset. Results compare three scenarios based on filtering applied to the deep features: Vanilla model (w/o Filter), Low-Pass Filter (LPF), and Edge Filter ( Fedge ). w/o Filter LPF Fedge 

train acc 21.8 17.4 22.4 

val acc 21.0 17.4 21.4 

during its ImageNet pretraining, rather than adapting them to the CIFAR-100 dataset. The perfor-mance observed with the Edge Filter suggests that it effectively filters out superficial information from the feature extractor, thereby better conveying task-relevant semantic signals to the classifier. This, in turn, indicates that deep learning models tend to encode domain-specific information in the low-frequency regions of deep features, while semantic information is predominantly encoded in the high-frequency regions. 

Decomposition of Deep Features. Let h ∈ Rd be a feature vector from a hidden layer of a deep network. We assume the feature can be additively decomposed as 

h = hsem + hdom , (2) where hsem encodes generalizable, task-relevant semantic features, and hdom represents domain-specific biases such as illumination, resolution, or background texture. 

Empirical Justification from Domain Adaptation. Domain adaptation research offers strong empirical support for this decomposition. In particular, several studies have shown that simply align-ing batch normalization (BN) statistics, the mean and variance of feature activations, between source and target domains leads to significant improvements in target accuracy [21, 42, 51, 44]. This sug-gests that domain-specific information is heavily embedded in the first- and second-order statistics 

of the features. These statistics primarily capture the global, low-frequency structure of features, including texture, color tone, and overall feature scale. Hence, domain-specific components such as hdom can be re-garded as low-frequency in nature. On the other hand, semantic components hsem , such as object boundaries, key phrases, or spatial discontinuities, tend to be spatially localized and structurally distinct. These elements are naturally more variable and correspond to high-frequency signal components. 

Sparse Coding through High-Pass Filtering. Under our proposed feature decomposition and frequency assumptions, we have: LPF (h) ≈ hdom ⇒ Fedge (h) ≈ hsem . (3) This approach of refining features by frequency filtering resonates strongly with the principles of sparse coding. In sparse coding, the objective is to find a concise representation for features h by expressing them as a linear combination of a small subset of basis vectors from an overcomplete dictionary D ∈ Rd×k:

h ≈ Dα, with ∥α∥0 ≪ k. (4) The connection becomes clear when we consider the effect of our frequency filtering: by remov-ing the low-frequency, domain-specific redundancies from h via edge filtering, we are essentially simplifying the signal that needs to be represented. This simplification naturally encourages greater sparsity in the corresponding coefficient vector α. The resulting feature representations, now fo-cused on semantic content, are therefore more compact and possess enhanced generalizability across different domains. Through the lens of domain adaptation, we argue that domain-specific features predominantly oc-cupy the low-frequency spectrum of hidden activations, while task-relevant semantic content resides in the high-frequency components. The proposed edge filtering strategy leverages this structure to improve feature generality and downstream performance across diverse domains. 43.2 Deep Edge Filter 

We propose a simple Deep Edge Filter applicable to deep features across all modalities. This filter functions as a high-pass operator, defined as the subtraction of the original feature and its LPF value, as specified in Eq. (1). For simplicity, we employ a mean filter as the default LPF throughout this paper unless otherwise stated. The Edge Filter is implemented channel-wise on each deep feature, with reflect padding applied to preserve input and output dimensions. To match the dimensions of deep features, we use different types of Edge Filters for different archi-tectures. For CNN-based architectures, we apply 2D Edge Filters because CNNs naturally process spatial relationships between neighboring pixels both vertically and horizontally. The 2D Edge Filter works by taking the l-th layer feature hl ∈ RHl×Wl×Cl and subtracting the LPF value across the spatial dimensions (Hl, W l) for each channel. For MLP and Transformer-based architectures, we apply 1D Edge Filters since these architectures don’t inherently process spatial relationships. For these models, the 1D Edge Filter operates on the l-th layer feature hl ∈ RNl×Cl by subtracting the 1D LPF value across the sequence length dimension Nl for each channel. The LPF component of the Deep Edge Filter is detached in the model training process to inhibit gradient backpropagation. This design choice reflects the non-learnable nature of the LPF, as our objective is to train the model exclusively on the high-pass filtered input. Furthermore, we implement the Edge Filter in only a single layer rather than introducing multiple filters within a model. This is because we have observed that using multiple filters in a model causes substantial information loss, making it difficult for the model to train properly. 

## 4 Experiments 

Modality Selection. Deep learning models extract features differently depending on input data modality. Images and videos, derived from natural world observations, typically exhibit sparse dis-tributions in their high-dimensional raw input space and contain inherent spatial patterns and visual attributes. In contrast, text data, generated according to human-defined linguistic rules, primarily en-codes semantic relationships. Even when embedded into feature spaces of common dimensionality, features from distinct modalities retain unique, modality-specific properties due to their fundamen-tally different underlying distributions. To test our claim rigorously, we conducted experiments on four modalities that have different char-acteristics. These modalities are Vision, which follows a nature-oriented distribution, Text, which follows human-defined rules and is defined in a discrete domain, 3D, which estimates spatial den-sity, and Audio, which has temporal patterns and frequency characteristics. Our experiments demon-strate that our methodology, inspired by edge detection, can be generalized across deep features from diverse modalities and architectures. 

Overview. To evaluate the efficacy of our approach, we selected tasks across various modalities where generalization capability plays a crucial role. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate consistent performance improvements, validating the hypothesis that Edge Filters effectively extract generalized features within deep neural networks. The following subsections correspond to exper-iments on selected tasks in each modality. Each subsection explains why the chosen task requires generalization capabilities and reports experimental results when applying Edge Filters. Implemen-tation details are provided in Sec. A. All experiments were run using a single A6000 GPU. 

4.1 Vision: Test-Time Adaptation 

Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) [42] is a task that adapts models pre-trained on a source domain to a target domain without access to source data. A model’s generalization capability is evaluated using datasets with significant domain shifts between source and target domains. Model adaptability improves when it captures generalizable and semantically meaningful patterns instead of overfitting to superficial or domain-specific cues. Therefore, better TTA performance indicates that the model has been effectively trained to extract general and semantic features during the learning process. We compare the performance of vanilla models and models with attached Edge Filters, both pre-trained under identical conditions, when applying TTA algorithms. Model evaluation is conducted using the commonly used CIFAR-10C/100C and ImageNet200-C benchmarks [14] for TTA task. 5Table 2: Test-time adaptation accuracy (%) results with and without filters as measured by the CIFAR-10C/100C and ImageNet200-C benchmarks with each TTA method applied.                                                         

> CIFAR-10C CIFAR-100C ImageNet200-C Method Source Direct NORM TENT Source Direct NORM TENT Source Direct NORM TENT WRN28-10 / ResNet18 91.9 49.6 73.8 74.6 69.8 26.2 46.6 48.0 58.8 2.0 23.9 21.6 +Fedge 90.8 57.7
> (+8.0)
> 75.3
> (+1.5)
> 75.8
> (+1.2) 65.4 36.4
> (+10.2)
> 49.7
> (+3.1)
> 50.5
> (+2.5) 55.5 2.1
> (+0.1)
> 25.8
> (+1.9)
> 23.2
> (+1.6)
> ViT-B/32 95.6 60.8 -60.9 82.3 41.3 -41.0 83.4 27.5 -30.7 +Fedge 95.3 68.1
> (+7.3) -69.4
> (+8.5) 81.8 41.7
> (+0.4) -42.0
> (+1.0) 93.1 29.4
> (+1.9) -32.6
> (+1.9)

These benchmarks validate models trained on each clean dataset CIFAR-10/100 [17] and Ima-geNet200 [33], against corrupted versions of each dataset. The results are presented in Tab. 2. Source 

represents evaluation results on the original, uncorrupted validation sets, while Direct shows results when pretrained models are applied directly to the corrupted sets without adaptation. Results after applying TTA methods NORM [35] and TENT [42] are also included. For Vit, since there is no BatchNorm layer, the NORM algorithm could not be applied. We modified the TENT implementa-tion to update parameters of LayerNorm layers instead of BatchNorm layers. As shown in Tab. 2, applying the Edge Filter yields significant performance improvements in both backbones regardless of the TTA methodology used. Performance improvements ranged from 1.2%p to 8.5%p on CIFAR-10C, from 0.4%p to 10.2%p on CIFAR-100C, and from 0.1%p to 1.9%p on ImageNet200-C across different methods. Particularly noteworthy is that despite the reduction in performance on the Source dataset when applying the Edge Filter, performance on corrupted datasets improved. This suggests that while vanilla models tend to overfit to the training dataset during the training stage, the Edge Filter removes domain-specific information, preventing overfitting and en-couraging the model to learn more general representations. 

4.2 Language: Sentiment Analysis 

General Language Understanding Evaluation (GLUE) benchmark is a standard evaluation tool that includes various natural language understanding (NLU) tasks [41]. We selected subtasks such as SST-2 (movie review sentiment analysis) [38], QQP (determining semantic equivalence of question pairs) [29], QNLI (determining if an answer is contained in a question) [31] for our experiments. A common characteristic of these language tasks is extracting specific discrete information (sentiment, semantic relationship, logical relationship) from vast high-dimensional text data (corpus). The cru-cial aspect in this process is effectively distinguishing necessary semantic information (signal) from unnecessary stylistic elements or additional information (noise). For example, in sentiment analy-sis, emotional expressions are signals while movie content details are noise. For language models to develop generalization capability, the ability to filter out such noise is important, and Edge Fil-ter can assist by preserving semantic information in high-frequency components while removing domain-specific information in low-frequency components. Experimental results are presented in Tab. 3. Performance improvements were observed in all GLUE subtasks when Edge Filter was applied. The most significant improvement (+1.49%p) occurred in the sentiment analysis task SST-2, which can be attributed to movie review data containing relatively more noise, including numerous movie-related additional information (actors, plot, scene descrip-tions, etc.) beyond sentiment expressions. Edge Filter effectively removes this noise, allowing the model to focus on information crucial for sentiment judgment. Table 3: Classification accuracy (%) for GLUE benchmark tasks with and without Fedge . Numbers in parentheses indicate performance improvement.                

> SST-2(Sentiment) QQP(Paraphrase) QNLI(Inference) Avg Transformer 79.36 83.42 62.40 75.06 +Fedge 80.85 (+1.49) 83.46 (+0.04) 63.30 (+0.90) 75.87 (+0.81)

64.3 3D: Few Shot Neural Radiance Field 

Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [24] relies on generalization capabilities that leverage deep learn-ing’s inherent interpolation abilities to accurately represent complex 3D spaces using a simple MLP architecture. Particularly, its ability to model 3D scenes from a small number of 2D images and ren-der from novel viewpoints demands generalization performance for unobserved viewpoints. These characteristics make it an appropriate modality for validating the efficacy of Edge Filter. While 3D objects possess complex geometric structures, NeRF essentially focuses on volume boundary prediction, which consists of discontinuities at object surfaces and boundaries that ex-hibit high-frequency characteristics. Conversely, low-frequency features such as uniform densities within objects or empty spaces are relatively less significant. Edge Filter can enhance generalization capability by preserving these high-frequency components (signal) while removing low-frequency components (noise). Since NeRF processes 3D data through 1D ray synthesis, we applied a 1D Edge Filter to the layer immediately preceding density calculation in the coarse network. For experiments, we used the widely-adopted Blender dataset[24], with results presented in Tab. 4. Performance improvements were observed in most scenes after applying Edge Filter, with an average enhancement of 5.2% for overall metrics. Most notably, the LPIPS metric decreased substantially to 11%. This supports our hypothesis because Edge Filter is designed to inject human prior. However, the scene ficus showed a 4.5% performance drop—likely because its naturally rich high-frequency textures, as shown in Fig. 2 rendered further enhancement by the Edge Filter redundant or even counterproductive. Table 4: Few-shot NeRF rendering quality with 8-view inputs on various scenes. Numbers in paren-theses indicate improvements.                                                                           

> PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓MAE ↓
> Scene NeRF +Fedge NeRF +Fedge NeRF +Fedge NeRF +Fedge
> chair 25.20 26.08 (+0.88) 0.911 0.917 (+0.006) 0.090 0.076 (-0.014) 0.018 0.016 (-0.002)
> drums 17.12 17.31 (+0.19) 0.761 0.770 (+0.009) 0.242 0.223 (-0.019) 0.055 0.053 (-0.002)
> ficus 22.33 22.12 (-0.21) 0.889 0.881 (-0.008) 0.075 0.084 (+0.009) 0.024 0.025 (+0.001)
> lego 24.58 24.53 (-0.05) 0.894 0.894 (+0.000) 0.074 0.071 (-0.003) 0.020 0.020 (+0.000)
> mic 27.64 28.17 (+0.53) 0.958 0.961 (+0.003) 0.049 0.041 (-0.008) 0.010 0.010 (+0.000)
> ship 20.80 22.19 (+1.39) 0.720 0.749 (+0.029) 0.224 0.175 (-0.049) 0.046 0.036 (-0.010)
> Avg 22.95 23.39 (+0.44) 0.856 0.862 (+0.006) 0.126 0.112 (-0.014) 0.029 0.027 (-0.002) NeRF + Edge Filter Ground -Truth

Figure 2: Qualitative analysis on NeRF. Overall, Edge filtering reduces floating artifacts. 7Overall, Edge Filter was confirmed to effectively remove view-dependent noise while preserving essential information such as boundary surfaces in 3D representation, thereby improving gener-alization performance. As shown in Fig. 2, NeRF with Edge Filter demonstrates visually cleaner rendering results. In particular, ‘floaters’ (indistinct areas faintly floating around objects) commonly occurring in conventional NeRF are significantly reduced. This is because Edge Filter effectively removes superficial noise, such as incorrectly predicted volume densities, while preserving high-frequency signals like object boundaries. Overall, Edge Filter effectively eliminates view-dependent noise while preserving key information such as boundary surfaces in 3D representation, thus en-hancing generalization performance. 

4.4 Audio: Audio Classification 

Audio classification tasks identify the type or source of sounds by extracting meaningful patterns from acoustic signals. In real-world environments, audio signals contain substantial noise and un-necessary background sounds, making it essential for classification models to effectively distinguish characteristic sounds (signal) from noise. Due to these properties, audio classification is another suitable modality for validating the effectiveness of Edge Filter. In our experiments, we used the UrbanSound8K dataset, which contains considerable noise acquired from urban environments. Ex-perimental results showed that models with Edge Filter applied demonstrated performance improve-ments from 77.42% to 81.72% compared to baseline models. This improvement is attributed to Edge Filter’s ability to emphasize characteristic sound patterns while effectively removing background noise, thereby enhancing classification performance. 

## 5 Analysis 

To investigate the impact of the Deep Edge Filter on model training, we measured the density of layer outputs throughout the training process. Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b demonstrate the output density of each WRN-28-10 layer by training epoch during the pretraining stage on the CIFAR-10 dataset as described in Section 4.1. Density values represent averages across the entire training dataset for each epoch. For the conv layer and block1 , which are positioned before the Edge Filter, minimal density differences were observed. In contrast, block2 and block3 , which are positioned after the Edge Filter, show significantly decreased output density when the Edge Filter is present. This effect is most pronounced in block2 , which is located right after the filter. This dramatic reduction in feature density following filter application experimentally validates the sparse coding of features resulting from high-pass filtering, as formulated in Eq. (4). Additionally, we performed FFT analysis to examine how the Deep Edge Filter influences the fre-quency domain characteristics of deep features. Fig. 3c demonstrates the average FFT results for the filter’s input and output on the CIFAR-10 validation set after completing the training shown in Fig. 3b. The graph shows the x-axis cross-section at the center of the 2D FFT, averaged across chan-nels. The FFT results demonstrate that the amplitude in the low-frequency region of deep features 10 20 30 40 50 

> Epoch
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> Output Density
> conv
> block1
> block2
> block3

(a) Without Filter 10 20 30 40 50  

> Epoch
> 0.2
> 0.3
> 0.4
> 0.5
> Output Density  conv
> block1
> block2
> block3

(b) Edge Filter attached 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0  

> Normalized Frequency
> 6.0
> 7.0
> 8.0
> 9.0
> Amplitude (log scale)
> before filter
> after filter

(c) Deep Feature FFT 

Figure 3: Statistical analysis of the impact of Edge Filter on deep features. Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b show the sparsity of output features for each block when training a vanilla model and a WRN-28-10 model with Edge Filter attached to block1 on the CIFAR-10 dataset, respectively. Fig. 3c represents the FFT amplitude spectra of both inputs and outputs from the Edge Filter when evaluated on the validation set after the training in Fig. 3b is completed. 8decreases after passing through the Edge Filter. This confirms that the Edge Filter, designed as a high-pass operator through LPF subtraction, functions as intended. 

5.1 Ablation studies 

Fig. 4 illustrates ablation studies conducted to examine the effects of Edge Filter’s attachment po-sition and kernel size. Performance gains compared to the baselines are represented as heatmaps. Layer 0 on the vertical axis denotes the stem network ( conv layer) of CNN-based models. Figures 4a and 4b present results from applying various filter configurations to the WRN-28-10 and ViT-B/32 models, respectively, on the CIFAR-10C benchmark using the Direct method. The WRN model shows a general trend of performance improvement with the Edge Filter application, achieving a maximum improvement of 9.6%p. For the ViT model, performance improvements were pronounced when filters were applied to later layers, while applying filters to earlier layers tended to decrease performance. Figure 4c shows results from applying filters with various configurations on SST-2, a language domain task. Performance either remained unchanged or improved regardless of the Edge Filter’s position and kernel size, with a maximum improvement of 3.6%p. In the audio domain, as shown in Figure 4d, performance fluctuated with variations ranging from -2.0%p to +3.6%p without exhibiting any clear trends. The statistical significance test results for the baseline of each task are shown in Sec. B. Table 5: Ablation study on vision domain (TTA) and language domain (SST-2) for filter types. 

Modality Vision Language Benchmark CIFAR-10C (Direct) SST-2 Backbone WRN ViT BERT Baseline 49.64 60.84 79.36 +Mean Fedge 57.65 (+8.01) 68.09 (+7.25) 80.85 (+1.49) 

+Median Fedge 59.69 (+10.05) 67.28 (+6.44) 81.60 (+2.24) 

+Gaussian Fedge 57.66 (+8.02) 56.37 (-4.47) 80.58 (+1.12) 

+Mean LPF 39.69 (-9.95) 47.96 (-26.68) 57.56 (-3.28) 

Tab. 5 presents an ablation study examining how model performance changes when different filters replace the mean filter in the LPF component of the Edge Filter. We compared mean, median, and Gaussian filters as LPFs, and also tested applying the mean filter (LPF) directly to deep features instead of using the Edge Filter. Our experiments utilized WRN and ViT backbones for vision tasks and the BERT backbone for language tasks, with filter configurations matching those in 4 and the Gaussian filter’s sigma set to 1.0. Results demonstrate that performance improvements remained consistent across different LPF types within the Edge Filter, indicating that various LPFs can be effectively incorporated into the Deep Edge Filter design. We observed a performance decline when using the Gaussian filter with ViT, likely due to using a default sigma value rather than optimizing it. When applying LPF directly to deep features, significant performance degradation occurred across all tasks, confirming that low-frequency components of deep features tend to encode domain-specific information, causing performance degradation in tasks requiring generalizability. 3 7 11 15          

> Kernel Size
> 0 1 2
> Layer
> -1.3 -0.9 2.5 -1.6
> 9.6 6.1 8.0 4.1
> 0.8 -0.4 0.4 2.6
> Vision_WRN_Direct

(a) Vision, TTA on WRN 3 5 7 9 11                  

> Kernel Size
> 2 5 8 11
> Layer
> -21.4 -4.7 -9.1 -4.8 -10.6
> -5.2 -1.6 -3.4 1.8 -4.3
> 2.6 3.2 -0.4 0.1 5.2
> 0.9 7.2 3.8 0.6 4.9
> Vision_ViT_Direct

(b) Vision, TTA on ViT 3 5 7       

> Kernel Size
> 3 5 9
> Layer
> 1.4 3.6 1.0
> 1.1 0.6 1.0
> 1.5 -0.0 0.9
> NLP_SST2

(c) Language, SST2 3 5 7       

> Kernel Size
> 0 1 2
> Layer
> -0.4 0.2 1.5
> 0.2 3.6 -1.8
> -2.0 1.4 0.6
> Audio_UrbanSound8k

(d) Audio, UrbanSound8k 

Figure 4: Heatmap of performance gain (%p) compared to the cases without Edge Filter, depending on the position and the kernel size of the Edge Filter. CIFAR-10C TTA benchmark is used in the vision domain, SST-2 in the language domain, and UrbanSound8k classification in the audio domain. 96 Conclusion 

In this paper, we show that Edge Filters can be applied directly to deep features in deep learning models to extract more generalized features from input data. This is based on the observation that deep learning models encode task-relevant semantic information in the high-frequency region, while domain-specific information in the low frequency region. Since domain-specific information often acts as a superficial feature in semantic inference tasks, filtering out the low frequencies can improve the model’s generalization ability. Experiments on various domains such as vision, language, 3D, and audio, validate the effectiveness of the proposed Deep Edge Filter and show that it is broadly applicable regardless of the data modality. 

Limitations and Future Works. Because our protocol requires retraining models from scratch after attaching the Edge Filter, we were unable to conduct more extensive experiments due to com-putational cost constraints. A limitation of this work is that we could not validate the methodology’s effectiveness on state-of-the-art models or across a wider variety of tasks. This limitation is particu-larly pronounced in the language domain, where experiments with LLMs were infeasible due to their high computational demands. Future work applying our approach to LLMs would provide valuable extensions to our claims from an application perspective. Additionally, given the domain-agnostic characteristics of the Deep Edge Filter, exploring its application to multimodal models represents another promising direction for future research. 

## Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding 

This work was supported by NRF grant (2021R1A2C3006659) and IITP grants (RS-2022-II220953, RS-2021-II211343, RS-2025-25442338), all funded by MSIT of the Korean Government. 

## References 

[1] Kwangjun Ahn, Sébastien Bubeck, Sinho Chewi, Yin Tat Lee, Felipe Suarez, and Yi Zhang. Learning threshold neurons via edge of stability. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36:19540– 19569, 2023. [2] Junbum Cha, Sanghyuk Chun, Kyungjae Lee, Han-Cheol Cho, Seunghyun Park, Yunsung Lee, and Sun-grae Park. Swad: Domain generalization by seeking flat minima. Advances in Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , 34:22405–22418, 2021. [3] Wei-Yu Chen, Yen-Cheng Liu, Zsolt Kira, Yu-Chiang Frank Wang, and Jia-Bin Huang. A closer look at few-shot classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.04232 , 2019. [4] Jeremy Cohen, Simran Kaur, Yuanzhi Li, J Zico Kolter, and Ameet Talwalkar. Gradient descent on neural networks typically occurs at the edge of stability. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , 2021. [5] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidi-rectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 conference of the North American chapter of the association for computational linguistics: human language technologies, volume 1 (long and short papers) , pages 4171–4186, 2019. [6] Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Un-terthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. [7] Yonggan Fu, Shunyao Zhang, Shang Wu, Cheng Wan, and Yingyan Lin. Patch-fool: Are vision trans-formers always robust against adversarial perturbations? In International Conference on Learning Rep-resentations , 2021. [8] Robert Geirhos, Patricia Rubisch, Claudio Michaelis, Matthias Bethge, Felix A Wichmann, and Wieland Brendel. Imagenet-trained cnns are biased towards texture; increasing shape bias improves accuracy and robustness. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2018. [9] Arthita Ghosh and Rama Chellappa. Deep feature extraction in the dct domain. In International Confer-ence on Pattern Recognition , pages 3536–3541. IEEE, 2016. 

10 [10] Ian J Goodfellow, Jonathon Shlens, and Christian Szegedy. Explaining and harnessing adversarial exam-ples. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2015. [11] Yuna Han and Byung-Woo Hong. Deep learning based on fourier convolutional neural network incorpo-rating random kernels. Electronics , 10(16):2004, 2021. [12] Kaiming He, Haoqi Fan, Yuxin Wu, Saining Xie, and Ross Girshick. Momentum contrast for unsupervised visual representation learning. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 9729–9738, 2020. [13] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 770–778, 2016. [14] Dan Hendrycks and Thomas Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to common corruptions and perturbations. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. [15] Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Nicholas Carlini, Rohan Taori, Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Hongseok Namkoong, John Miller, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Ali Farhadi, et al. Openclip. Zenodo , 2021. [16] Kenji Kawaguchi, Leslie Pack Kaelbling, and Yoshua Bengio. Generalization in deep learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.05468 , 1(8), 2017. [17] Alex Krizhevsky and Geoffrey Hinton. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, Citeseer, 2009. [18] Ananya Kumar, Tengyu Ma, and Percy Liang. Understanding self-training for gradual domain adaptation. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 5468–5479. PMLR, 2020. [19] Dongkwan Lee, Kyomin Hwang, and Nojun Kwak. Unlocking the potential of unlabeled data in semi-supervised domain generalization. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-tion , pages 30599–30608, 2025. [20] Da Li, Yongxin Yang, Yi-Zhe Song, and Timothy M Hospedales. Deeper, broader and artier domain generalization. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pages 5542– 5550, 2017. [21] Yanghao Li, Naiyan Wang, Jianping Shi, Xiaodi Hou, and Jiaying Liu. Adaptive batch normalization for practical domain adaptation. Pattern Recognition , 80:109–117, 2018. [22] Shiqi Lin, Zhizheng Zhang, Zhipeng Huang, Yan Lu, Cuiling Lan, Peng Chu, Quanzeng You, Jiang Wang, Zicheng Liu, Amey Parulkar, et al. Deep frequency filtering for domain generalization. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 11797–11807, 2023. [23] Yawei Luo, Liang Zheng, Tao Guan, Junqing Yu, and Yi Yang. Taking a closer look at domain shift: Category-level adversaries for semantics consistent domain adaptation. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 2507–2516, 2019. [24] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Communications of the ACM ,65(1):99–106, 2021. [25] Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Alhussein Fawzi, Omar Fawzi, and Pascal Frossard. Universal ad-versarial perturbations. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 1765–1773, 2017. [26] Varsha Nair, Moitrayee Chatterjee, Neda Tavakoli, Akbar Siami Namin, and Craig Snoeyink. Fast fourier transformation for optimizing convolutional neural networks in object recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.04257 , 2020. [27] Michael Niemeyer, Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Andreas Geiger, and Noha Radwan. Regnerf: Regularizing neural radiance fields for view synthesis from sparse inputs. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 5480–5490, 2022. [28] Xingchao Peng, Qinxun Bai, Xide Xia, Zijun Huang, Kate Saenko, and Bo Wang. Moment matching for multi-source domain adaptation. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 1406–1415, 2019. [29] Quora. Quora question pairs. Kaggle Competition, 2017. 

11 [30] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learning transferable visual models from nat-ural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 8748–8763. PmLR, 2021. [31] Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. Squad: 100,000+ questions for machine comprehension of text. In Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 2383–2392, 2016. [32] Oren Rippel, Jasper Snoek, and Ryan P Adams. Spectral representations for convolutional neural net-works. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 28, 2015. [33] Olga Russakovsky, Jia Deng, Hao Su, Jonathan Krause, Sanjeev Satheesh, Sean Ma, Zhiheng Huang, Andrej Karpathy, Aditya Khosla, Michael Bernstein, Alexander C. Berg, and Li Fei-Fei. Imagenet large scale visual recognition challenge. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV) , 115(3):211–252, 2015. [34] Justin Salamon, Christopher Jacoby, and Juan Pablo Bello. A dataset and taxonomy for urban sound research. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international conference on Multimedia , pages 1041–1044, 2014. [35] Steffen Schneider, Evgenia Rusak, Luisa Eck, Oliver Bringmann, Wieland Brendel, and Matthias Bethge. Improving robustness against common corruptions by covariate shift adaptation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 33:11539–11551, 2020. [36] Christoph Schuhmann, Romain Beaumont, Richard Vencu, Cade W Gordon, Ross Wightman, Mehdi Cherti, Theo Coombes, Aarush Katta, Clayton Mullis, Mitchell Wortsman, Patrick Schramowski, Sri-vatsa R Kundurthy, Katherine Crowson, Ludwig Schmidt, Robert Kaczmarczyk, and Jenia Jitsev. Laion-5b: An open large-scale dataset for training next generation image-text models. In Thirty-sixth Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2022. [37] Saurabh Singh and Shankar Krishnan. Filter response normalization layer: Eliminating batch depen-dence in the training of deep neural networks. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 11237–11246, 2020. [38] Richard Socher, Alex Perelygin, Jean Wu, Jason Chuang, Christopher D Manning, Andrew Y Ng, and Christopher Potts. Recursive deep models for semantic compositionality over a sentiment treebank. In 

Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing , pages 1631–1642, 2013. [39] Chenyang Song, Xu Han, Zhengyan Zhang, Shengding Hu, Xiyu Shi, Kuai Li, Chen Chen, Zhiyuan Liu, Guangli Li, Tao Yang, and Maosong Sun. Prosparse: Introducing and enhancing intrinsic activation spar-sity within large language models. In Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Computational Linguistics , pages 2626–2644. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2025. [40] Puru Vaish, Shunxin Wang, and Nicola Strisciuglio. Fourier-basis functions to bridge augmentation gap: Rethinking frequency augmentation in image classification. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 17763–17772, 2024. [41] Alex Wang, Amanpreet Singh, Julian Michael, Felix Hill, Omer Levy, and Samuel R. Bowman. Glue: A multi-task benchmark and analysis platform for natural language understanding. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2019. [42] Dequan Wang, Evan Shelhamer, Shaoteng Liu, Bruno Olshausen, and Trevor Darrell. Tent: Fully test-time adaptation by entropy minimization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2021. [43] Zheng Wang, Zhenwei Gao, Guoqing Wang, Yang Yang, and Heng Tao Shen. Visual embedding augmen-tation in fourier domain for deep metric learning. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology , 33(10):5538–5548, 2023. [44] Yanan Wu, Zhixiang Chi, Yang Wang, Konstantinos N Plataniotis, and Songhe Feng. Test-time domain adaptation by learning domain-aware batch normalization. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 38, pages 15961–15969, 2024. [45] Kai Xu, Minghai Qin, Fei Sun, Yuhao Wang, Yen-Kuang Chen, and Fengbo Ren. Learning in the fre-quency domain. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 1740– 1749, 2020. [46] Li Xu, Jimmy Ren, Qiong Yan, Renjie Liao, and Jiaya Jia. Deep edge-aware filters. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1669–1678. PMLR, 2015. 

12 [47] Qinwei Xu, Ruipeng Zhang, Ya Zhang, Yanfeng Wang, and Qi Tian. A fourier-based framework for domain generalization. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 14383–14392, 2021. [48] Zhenlin Xu, Deyi Liu, Junlin Yang, Colin Raffel, and Marc Niethammer. Robust and generalizable visual representation learning via random convolutions. In International Conference on Learning Representa-tions , 2021. [49] Zhi-Qin John Xu, Yaoyu Zhang, Tao Luo, Yanyang Xiao, and Zheng Ma. Frequency principle: Fourier analysis sheds light on deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.06523 , 2019. [50] Zhiqin John Xu and Hanxu Zhou. Deep frequency principle towards understanding why deeper learning is faster. In AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 35, pages 10541–10550, 2021. [51] Jayeon Yoo, Dongkwan Lee, Inseop Chung, Donghyun Kim, and Nojun Kwak. What how and when should object detectors update in continually changing test domains? In IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-puter Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 23354–23363, 2024. [52] Sergey Zagoruyko and Nikos Komodakis. Wide residual networks. In Edwin R. Hancock Richard C. Wil-son and William A. P. Smith, editors, Proceedings of the British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC) ,pages 87.1–87.12. BMVA Press, September 2016. [53] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable ef-fectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 586–595, 2018. 

13 NeurIPS Paper Checklist 

The checklist is designed to encourage best practices for responsible machine learning research, ad-dressing issues of reproducibility, transparency, research ethics, and societal impact. Do not remove the checklist: The papers not including the checklist will be desk rejected. The checklist should follow the references and follow the (optional) supplemental material. The checklist does NOT count towards the page limit. Please read the checklist guidelines carefully for information on how to answer these questions. For each question in the checklist: • You should answer [Yes] , [No] , or [NA] . • [NA] means either that the question is Not Applicable for that particular paper or the relevant information is Not Available. • Please provide a short (1–2 sentence) justification right after your answer (even for NA). 

The checklist answers are an integral part of your paper submission. They are visible to the reviewers, area chairs, senior area chairs, and ethics reviewers. You will be asked to also include it (after eventual revisions) with the final version of your paper, and its final version will be published with the paper. The reviewers of your paper will be asked to use the checklist as one of the factors in their evalu-ation. While "[Yes] " is generally preferable to "[No] ", it is perfectly acceptable to answer "[No] " provided a proper justification is given (e.g., "error bars are not reported because it would be too computationally expensive" or "we were unable to find the license for the dataset we used"). In gen-eral, answering "[No] " or "[NA] " is not grounds for rejection. While the questions are phrased in a binary way, we acknowledge that the true answer is often more nuanced, so please just use your best judgment and write a justification to elaborate. All supporting evidence can appear either in the main paper or the supplemental material, provided in appendix. If you answer [Yes] to a question, in the justification please point to the section(s) where related material for the question can be found. IMPORTANT, please: • Delete this instruction block, but keep the section heading “NeurIPS Paper Check-list" ,• Keep the checklist subsection headings, questions/answers and guidelines below. 

• Do not modify the questions and only use the provided macros for your answers .1. Claims 

Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The abstract of the paper clearly reflects the contribution and scope of the work performed. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper. • The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers. • The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings. • It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper. 2. Limitations 

Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors? Answer: [Yes] 14 Justification: We provide the limitations of this paper in the Conclusion section with a limitations and future work paragraph. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper. • The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper. • The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The au-thors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be. • The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated. • The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the ap-proach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon. • The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size. • If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to ad-dress problems of privacy and fairness. • While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers dis-cover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an important role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Re-viewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations. 3. Theory assumptions and proofs 

Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof? Answer: [NA] Justification: This paper does not claim any theoretical contributions. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results. • All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced. • All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theo-rems. • The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition. • Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be comple-mented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material. • Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced. 4. Experimental result reproducibility 

Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main experimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclu-sions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)? Answer: [Yes] Justification: The experiments in this paper are based on open source code and we describe the hyperparameters we used to run the experiments in as much detail as possible. 15 Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not. • If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable. • Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed. • While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all sub-missions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example (a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm. (b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully. (c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to re-produce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset). (d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case au-thors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results. 5. Open access to data and code 

Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material? Answer: [No] Justification: This thesis encompasses a wide range of experiments, which makes it difficult to submit code for all of them thoroughly. Nevertheless, code for the experiments that are important to this thesis, such as the vision domain, have been submitted. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code. • Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/ public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark). • The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https: //nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy ) for more details. • The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc. • The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why. 16 • At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable). • Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted. 6. Experimental setting/details 

Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyper-parameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We’ve detailed the datasets, hyperparameters, and other settings we used in our experiments. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them. • The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material. 7. Experiment statistical significance 

Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropri-ate information about the statistical significance of the experiments? Answer: [No] Justification: Due to the large number of experiments performed and the computationally heavy nature of this thesis, which requires pretraining, we were unable to run repeated experiments. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confi-dence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper. • The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions). • The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.) • The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors). • It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean. • It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should prefer-ably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified. • For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates). • If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text. 8. Experiments compute resources 

Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We briefly disclose the computational resources used in the experiment. 17 Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments. • The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage. • The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute. • The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper). 9. Code of ethics 

Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines ?Answer: [Yes] Justification: Our research conforms NeurIPS Code of Ethics. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics. • If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics. • The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction). 10. Broader impacts 

Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative so-cietal impacts of the work performed? Answer: [NA] Justification: Our work is not expected to have a societal impact. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed. • If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact. • Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact spe-cific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations. • The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster. • The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology. • If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitiga-tion strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML). 11. Safeguards 

Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)? 18 Answer: [NA] Justification: Our paper is expected to pose no such risks. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks. • Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by re-quiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters. • Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images. • We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort. 12. Licenses for existing assets 

Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected? Answer: [Yes] Justification: We have credited and cited the codes and assets we used. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets. • The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset. • The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL. • The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset. • For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided. • If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the pack-age should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the li-cense of a dataset. • For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided. • If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators. 13. New assets 

Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documenta-tion provided alongside the assets? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not release new assets. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets. • Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, lim-itations, etc. • The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used. • At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file. 14. Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects 

19 Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the pa-per include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contri-bution of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper. • According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, cura-tion, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector. 15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human subjects 

Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained? Answer: [NA] Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects. • Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equiva-lent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper. • We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution. • For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review. 16. Declaration of LLM usage 

Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and does not impact the core methodology, scientific rigorousness, or originality of the research, declaration is not required. Answer: [NA] Justification: No LLM was used in the core method development. Guidelines: • The answer NA means that the core method development in this research does not involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components. • Please refer to our LLM policy ( https://neurips.cc/Conferences/2025/LLM )for what should or should not be described. 20 A Implementation Details 

A.1 Vision Domain 

Following the convention of the benchmarks, we used two Convolution-based models and one Transformer-based model: the CNN-structured WideResNet28-10 [52] for CIFAR datasets, ResNet18 [13] for ImageNet200 dataset, and the Transformer-structured ViT-B/32 [6] for all datasets. Learning rates of 1e-3 were applied to the convolution-based models, and 5e-5 was ap-plied to ViT. Convolution-based models were trained from scratch, while ViT model was trained from the ImageNet1k pre-trained weights. We conducted training for 50 epochs for CIFAR10/100, while 5 epochs for ImageNet200, with a batch size of 128. The severity level of dataset corruptions was set to 5. For WRN28-10, 2D Edge Filter with kernel size 11 was applied after block 1 out of three blocks, while for ResNet18, kernel size 11 was applied after block 2 out of four blocks. For ViT-B/32, 1D Edge Filter with kernel size 5 for the CIFAR datasets and kernel size 3 for the ImageNet200 dataset after block index 11 out of the block indices ranging from 0 to 11. 

A.2 Language Domain 

We used the vanilla 12-layer transformer, which is the standard BERT architecture [5], training from scratch, and applied a 1D Edge Filter with kernel size 3 after block 9. For training, we used AdamW optimizer, with a batch size of 512, a learning rate of 5e-5, and a weight decay of 1e-2 for 40 epochs. 

A.3 3D Domain 

Experiments were conducted in the 8-view few-shot [27] setting using various 3D objects (ship, mic, lego, ficus, drums, chair) from the Blender dataset [24]. We followed the same optimization settings as the default NeRF implementation on the Blender dataset, and the kernel size is set to 5. Training was performed for 500 pixel epochs, and we used PSNR, SSIM, LPIPS [53], and MAE metrics for performance evaluation to measure different aspects of rendering quality. We applied a 1D Edge Filter with kernel size 5 to the coarse network prior to computing the density σ.

A.4 Audio Domain 

We used the UrbanSound8K [34] dataset, which includes 10 urban sound classes (e.g., car horn, children playing, dog barking). The model architecture consists of three convolutional blocks, and we add 2D Edge Filter with a kernel size of 7 after the third layer. The model was trained for 20 epochs using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 0.001. 

## B Statistical Analysis 

We conducted a replication study using multiple experimental runs with different random seeds to assess the statistical significance of the results presented in Fig. 4. Given the observed performance improvements over the baseline condition shown in Fig. 4, we calculated the mean and standard error of baseline performance metrics across replicate experiments to determine whether the effects of the Edge Filter method achieve statistical significance. Tab. 6 presents the means and standard deviations computed from five independent experimental runs using different random seeds for each modality under investigation. Table 6: Statistical analysis on baseline performances (%) across modalities                   

> Domain Vision Language Audio Benchmark CIFAR10C (Direct) SST-2 UrbanSound8k Backbone WRN ViT BERT CNN Mean 49.37 61.84 79.89 76.99 SD 2.46 2.47 0.52 0.98

21 3 7 11 15          

> Kernel Size
> 0 1 2
> Layer
> -0.5 -0.4 1.0 -0.7
> 3.9 2.5 3.3 1.7
> 0.3 -0.2 0.2 1.1
> Sigma_Vision_WRN_Direct

(a) Vision, TTA on WRN 3 5 7 9 11                  

> Kernel Size
> 2 5 8 11
> Layer
> -8.7 -1.9 -3.7 -1.9 -4.3
> -2.1 -0.7 -1.4 0.7 -1.7
> 1.0 1.3 -0.2 0.0 2.1
> 0.4 2.9 1.5 0.2 2.0
> Sigma_Vision_ViT_Direct

(b) Vision, TTA on ViT 3 5 7       

> Kernel Size
> 3 5 9
> Layer
> 2.6 6.8 2.0
> 2.2 1.1 2.0
> 2.9 -0.0 1.8
> Sigma_NLP_SST2

(c) Language, SST2 3 5 7       

> Kernel Size
> 0 1 2
> Layer
> -0.4 0.2 1.5
> 0.2 3.7 -1.8
> -2.0 1.4 0.7
> Sigma_Audio_UrbanSound8k

(d) Audio, UrbanSound8k 

Figure 5: Heatmap of performance gains as multiples of standard deviation ( σ), represents the statistical significance of Fig. 4. To evaluate the statistical significance of the performance improvements, we demonstrate the nor-malized performance analysis by plotting the performance gains expressed in standard deviations ( σ)relative to the baseline standard deviation for each experimental condition, as presented in Fig. 5. This analysis shows that the performance gains across multiple modalities and backbone architec-tures exceed two standard deviations ( 2σ) from the baseline mean, thereby demonstrating statisti-cally significant improvements attributable to the Edge Filter. 

## C T-SNE Visualizaiton 

We performed t-SNE visualization on vision domain data to visually confirm the effect of the Edge Filter on deep learning models. Figures Fig. 6 and Fig. 7 show the t-SNE visualization results for the CIFAR-10 validation set extracted from a model trained on the CIFAR-10 dataset and for the features of CIFAR10-C, which is the CIFAR-10 dataset with added corruption, respectively. The WRN and ViT models, along with the attached mean filter, are identical to those used in Sec. 4.1. WRN vanilla WRN mean filter ViT vanilla ViT mean filter 

Figure 6: Comparison of t-SNE visualizations for vanilla WRN and ViT backbones with and without Mean Filters applied to CIFAR10 validation set. WRN vanilla WRN mean filter ViT vanilla ViT mean filter 

Figure 7: Comparison of t-SNE visualizations for vanilla WRN and ViT backbones with and without Mean Filters applied to corrupted images of CIFAR10 validation set, CIFAR10-C. Visualization results on the clean validation set, as seen in Fig. 6, showed no distinct difference in feature distributions between the vanilla model and the model with a mean filter attached, for both the WRN and ViT backbones. Meanwhile, visualization results for corrupted images, as seen 22 in Fig. 7, show that the model generally struggles to distinguish classes well compared to clean images, resulting in blurred class clusters. Comparing the model with the mean filter attached to the vanilla model here reveals that, regardless of the backbone, the model with the mean filter exhibits relatively clear boundaries between classes. Notably, the difference in distribution between models with and without the mean filter is even more pronounced on the ViT backbone. These visual results align with the numerical findings in Tab. 2, confirming the role of the Edge Filter in enhancing model robustness, improving performance over the vanilla model on corrupted images. 

## D Full Experiment Result for TTA 

Tab. 7 and Tab. 8 break down the results of Tab. 2 for 15 different corruption types [14]. They show that Edge Filter improves performance for the vast majority of corruptions. Table 7: Classification accuracy (%) for all corruptions in CIFAR10-C                                                                                                                                                                                          

> Noise Blur Weather Digital Method Backbone Gau Sht Imp Def Gls Mtn Zm Snw Frs Fog Brt Cnt Els Px Jpg Avg Direct WRN28-10 17.9 22.3 22.4 47.8 40.2 52.1 55.2 69.1 60.0 68.1 86.7 33.8 60.7 44.1 64.2 49.6 +Fedge 42.2 48.7 36.4 56.3 50.5 64.1 63.3 70.6 65.7 67.8 86.2 33.1 68.1 43.3 68.7 57.7 NORM WRN28-10 64.9 67.4 56.5 82.6 58.8 80.0 82.4 76.8 76.1 80.7 87.6 80.2 70.6 72.9 69.0 73.8 +Fedge 68.4 70.5 59.4 82.7 60.8 80.5 83.2 76.5 77.7 80.7 87.4 83.2 72.6 74.8 71.1 75.3 TENT WRN28-10 65.7 68.8 58.1 83.2 60.0 80.4 83.4 77.7 76.4 81.6 87.9 81.0 71.5 74.2 69.9 74.6 +Fedge 69.2 71.4 60.5 83.1 61.6 80.8 83.7 76.8 78.3 81.1 87.7 83.6 72.9 75.4 71.5 75.8 Direct ViT-B/32 61.8 65.7 37.5 51.9 65.2 53.4 59.0 77.5 76.3 39.7 85.2 15.4 69.1 80.0 75.0 60.8 +Fedge 67.5 71.8 46.4 70.2 69.8 66.9 72.2 80.1 79.9 55.5 85.0 20.7 75.9 80.7 79.0 68.1 TENT ViT-B/32 62.9 66.4 31.2 51.6 66.6 53.9 60.5 78.5 78.0 37.4 86.0 13.9 70.5 80.8 75.6 60.9 +Fedge 69.2 73.3 46.2 73.4 70.3 69.2 73.9 80.5 81.3 56.1 85.5 23.8 76.7 81.8 79.4 69.4

Table 8: Classification accuracy (%) for all corruptions in CIFAR100-C                                                                                                                                                                                          

> Noise Blur Weather Digital Method Backbone Gau Sht Imp Def Gls Mtn Zm Snw Frs Fog Brt Cnt Els Px Jpg Avg Direct WRN28-10 10.2 11.7 6.5 24.0 18.8 29.8 29.3 36.4 26.5 34.4 57.3 16.7 41.4 16.8 33.3 26.2 +Fedge 25.3 27.4 14.2 33.6 39.7 35.7 39.2 42.6 42.9 32.0 52.1 14.5 46.4 50.9 48.9 36.4 NORM WRN28-10 33.8 34.3 26.8 57.0 37.2 53.5 57.3 46.5 47.4 50.6 63.4 55.0 46.7 50.0 38.7 46.6 +Fedge 42.3 43.4 33.2 58.1 44.5 54.7 58.3 49.3 50.9 47.2 60.7 45.1 50.5 56.3 50.8 49.7 TENT WRN28-10 36.1 36.4 28.6 58.1 38.4 54.4 59.4 47.3 48.5 51.6 63.7 56.8 48.1 52.0 40.1 48.0 +Fedge 43.9 44.4 34.2 58.9 45.1 54.9 58.5 50.2 52.0 48.1 60.8 46.1 51.4 57.4 51.1 50.5 Direct ViT-B/32 37.5 41.1 21.0 37.7 35.4 37.4 43.9 55.7 53.7 27.6 67.4 8.0 46.6 57.3 48.6 41.3 +Fedge 34.2 38.5 17.8 42.3 36.3 41.2 48.1 53.9 55.2 30.9 64.4 9.9 48.3 51.7 52.3 41.7 TENT ViT-B/32 40.0 42.5 21.5 35.5 34.6 35.3 43.5 57.4 54.5 22.8 68.4 5.4 46.5 58.9 48.8 41.0 +Fedge 34.8 39.1 17.4 43.1 35.9 41.9 49.7 54.8 56.3 28.2 65.7 8.2 48.8 53.4 52.7 42.0

## E Expansion to Foundational Models 

We validate whether our hypothesis remains effective in larger foundation models. To verify the effect of Edge Filter, we adopt a few-shot prototype matching evaluation protocol [12, 3] that mea-sures the quality of the encoder’s feature representations. Specifically, we construct prototypes by averaging the features of samples belonging to each class, and measure classification performance based on these prototypes. We select foundation model ViT-L/14 OpenCLIP [15, 30] trained on the LAION2B dataset [36]. This model has learned robust representations across diverse visual domains through large-scale web-scale data training, making it well-suited for evaluating domain generalization capabilities. We conduct cross-domain generalization experiments to evaluate whether the Edge Filter is also effective for larger models. This task measures the performance when prototypes extracted from one domain are applied to samples from another domain. We conduct Photo-to-Sketch, Sketch-to-Photo, Real-to-Sketch, and Sketch-to-Real transfer scenarios on the PACS [20] and DomainNet [28] datasets. As a result, we observed that applying Edge Filter also improves performance for larger foundation model, as shown in Tab. 9. 23 Table 9: Cross-domain few-shot classification accuracy (%) on PACS and DomainNet datasets. Numbers in parentheses indicate improvements over the baseline.                    

> PACS: Photo to Sketch PACS: Sketch to Photo DomainNet: Real to Sketch DomainNet: Sketch to Real Method Baseline +Fedge Baseline +Fedge Baseline +Fedge Baseline +Fedge
> Accuracy 59.07 63.22 (+4.15) 54.31 60.12 (+5.81) 24.79 25.00 (+0.21) 39.23 39.53 (+0.30)

## F Effect of increased computation 

To demonstrate that the performance improvement from the Edge Filter is not merely an effect of increased computation, we additionally conducted experiments comparing its performance with a model where the Edge Filter was replaced by a Convolution layer with the same computational load. Since it is widely known that performance tends to improve as the computational load of deep learning models increases, comparing these two cases with identical computational loads allows us to isolate the pure effect of the Edge Filter, excluding the impact of increased computation. The table below Tab. 10 shows the results of replacing the Edge Filter with a trainable 2D Conv layer of the same kernel size in the CIFAR10-C WRN28-10 experiment from Tab. 2. All other experimental conditions are identical to those used with the original Edge Filter. Table 10: Comparison of CIFAR10-C TTA performance when replacing the Edge Filter with a train-able 2D Conv layer with equivalent computational load Source Direct NORM TENT No filter 91.9 49.6 73.8 74.6 Conv layer 90.6 46.9 71.3 72.3 Edge filter 90.8 57.7 75.3 75.8 

As seen in Tab. 10, replacing the Edge Filter with a trainable Convolution layer of equivalent com-putation load actually resulted in decreased performance on corrupted images. This demonstrates that the Edge Filter’s effectiveness holds true even when accounting for the increased computational load introduced by its addition. 24